COOPER: I'm Anderson Cooper. Thanks for joining us. We've already welcomed the candidates on stage. They are in place at their podiums. Before we dive into the issues, I want to quickly explain some of the groundrules tonight. 
As the moderator, I'll ask questions, followups and guide the discussion. I'll be joined in the questioning by CNN's Juan Carlos Lopez and Dana Bash, a well as Don Lemon who will share questions from Democrats around the country. Each candidate will get one minute to answer questions, and 30 seconds for followups and rebuttals. I'll give candidates time to respond if they have been singled out for criticism. 
Our viewers should know that we have lights that are visible to the candidates to warn them when their time is up. 
I want the candidates to be able to introduce themselves to our audience. Each candidate will have two minutes to introduce themselves. 
Let's begin with Governor Chafee. 
Governor? 

CHAFEE: Thank you, Anderson. 
Thank you, CNN, and thank you Facebook for organizing this debate. 
Not only will Americans be electing a new president next year, we also will be electing a world leader. Voters should assess the candidate's experience, character and vision for the future as they make this important decision. 
I'm the only one running for president that has been a mayor, a United States senator, and a governor. As mayor, I brought labor peace to my city and kept taxes down. I was reelected three times. As a senator, I earned a reputation for courageous votes against the Bush-Cheney tax cuts the favored the wealthy, against the tragedy of the Iraq war, for environmental stewardship, for protection of our civil liberties. I served on the Foreign Relations Committee and I chaired the Middle East Subcommittee for four years. 
As governor, I came in at the depths of the recession and we turned my state around. Rhode Island had the biggest drop of the unemployment rate over my four budgets of all but one state. It happens to be Nevada, where we're having this debate. I'm very proud that over my almost 30 years of public service, I have had no scandals. I've always been honest. I have the courage to take the long-term view, and I've shown good judgment. I have high ethical standards. 
As we look to the future, I want to address the income inequality, close the gap between the haves and the have-nots. I want to address climate change, a real threat to our planet. And I believe in prosperity through peace. I want to end these wars. 
I look forward to the discussion ahead. 
Thank you [applause] 

COOPER: Thank you very much, Governor. [applause] 
Senator Webb, you have two minutes. 

WEBB: Thank you. 
You know, people are disgusted with the way that money has corrupted our political process, intimidating incumbents and empowering Wall Street every day, the turnstile government that we see, and also the power of the financial sector in both parties. 
They're looking for a leader who understands how the system works, who has not been coopted by it, and also has a proven record of accomplishing different things. I have a record of working across the political aisle. I've also spent more than half of my professional life away from politics in the independent world of being an author, a journalist, and a sole proprietor. 
In government service, I've fought and bled for our country in Vietnam as a Marine. I spent years as Assistant Secretary of Defense, Secretary of the Navy — in the Reagan administration. 
In the senate, I spoke about economic fairness and social justice from day one. I also wrote and passed the best piece of veterans education legislation in history, the Post 9/11 G.I. Bill. I brought criminal justice reform out of the political shadows and into the national discussion. I led what later became called the Strategic Pivot to Asia two years before President Obama was elected. 
I know where my loyalties are. 
My mother grew up in the poverty of east Arkansas chopping cotton, picking strawberries. Three of her seven siblings died in childhood. My wife, Hong, came to this country as a refugee from war torn Vietnam — learned English, a language that was not spoken at home, and earned her way into Cornell Law School. I have five daughters. Amy works with disabled veterans, Sarah is an emergency room nurse, Julia is a massage therapist, Emily and Georgia are still in school. My son Jim fought as an infantry Marine on the bloody streets of Ramadi. 
You may be sure that in a Webb administration, the highest priority will be the working people who every day go out and make this country stronger at home, and who give us the right reputation and security overseas under a common sense foreign policy. [cheering and applause]

COOPER: Governor O'Malley, you have two minutes. 
O'MALLEY: My name is Martin O'Malley, former Mayor of Baltimore, former governor of Maryland, a life long democrat, and most importantly, a husband, and a father. 
My wife Katie and I have four great kids, Grace, and Tara, and William and Jack. And, like you, there is nothing we wouldn't do to give them healthier and better lives. There are some things that I have learned to do better in life than others. And, after 15 years of executive experience, I have learned how to be an effective leader. 
Whether it was raising the minimum wage, making our public schools the best in America, passing marriage equality, the DREAM Act, and comprehensive gun safety legislation, I have learned how to get things done because I am very clear about my principals. 
Thanks to President Obama, our country has come a long way since the Wall Street crash of 2008. Our country's doing better, we are creating jobs again. But we elected a president, not a magician, and there is urgent work that needs to be done right now. For there is a — deep injustice, an economic injustice that threatens to tear our country apart, and it will not solve itself. Injustice does not solve itself. 
What I'm talking about is this, our middle class is shrinking. Our poor families are becoming poorer, and 70 percent of us are earning the same, or less than we were 12 years ago. We need new leadership, and we need action. The sort of action that will actually make wages go up again for all American families. 
Our economy isn't money, it's people. It's all of our people, and so we must invest in our country, and the potential of our kids to make college a debt free option for all of our families, instead of settling our kids with a lifetime of crushing debt. 
And, we must square our shoulders to the great challenge of climate change and make this threat our opportunity. The future is what we make of it. We are all in this together. And, the question in this election is whether you and I still have the ability to give our kids a better future. I believe we do, that is why I am running for president, and I need your help. 
Thank you. [applause] 

COOPER: Governor O'Malley, thank you very much. Senator Sanders. 
SANDERS: Anderson, thank you very much. I think most Americans understand that our country today faces a series of unprecedented crises. The middle class of this country for the last 40 years has been disappearing. Millions of Americans are working longer hours for lower wages, and yet almost all of the new income and wealth being created is going to the top one percent. 
As a result of this disastrous Citizens United Supreme Court decision, our campaign finance system is corrupt and is undermining American democracy. Millionaires and billionaires are pouring unbelievable sums of money into the political process in order to fund super PACs and to elect candidates who represent their interests, not the interests of working people. 
Today, the scientific community is virtually unanimous: climate change is real, it is caused by human activity, and we have a moral responsibility to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy and leave this planet a habitable planet for our children and our grandchildren. 
Today in America, we have more people in jail than any other country on Earth. African-American youth unemployment is 51 percent. Hispanic youth unemployment is 36 percent. It seems to me that instead of building more jails and providing more incarceration, maybe — just maybe — we should be putting money into education and jobs for our kids. [applause] 
What this campaign is about is whether we can mobilize our people to take back our government from a handful of billionaires and create the vibrant democracy we know we can and should have. Thank you. [applause] 

COOPER: Secretary Clinton? 
CLINTON: Well, thank you, and thanks to everyone for hosting this first of the Democratic debates. 
I'm Hillary Clinton. I have been proud and privileged to serve as first lady, as a senator from New York, and as secretary of state. I'm the granddaughter of a factory worker and the grandmother of a wonderful one-year-old child. And every day, I think about what we need to do to make sure that opportunity is available not just for her, but for all of our children. I have spent a very long time — my entire adult life — looking for ways to even the odds to help people have a chance to get ahead, and, in particular, to find the ways for each child to live up to his or her God-given potential. 
I've traveled across our country over the last months listening and learning, and I've put forward specific plans about how we're going to create more good-paying jobs: by investing in infrastructure and clean energy, by making it possible once again to invest in science and research, and taking the opportunity posed by climate change to grow our economy. 
At the center of my campaign is how we're going to raise wages. Yes, of course, raise the minimum wage, but we have to do so much more, including finding ways so that companies share profits with the workers who helped to make them. 
And then we have to figure out how we're going to make the tax system a fairer one. Right now, the wealthy pay too little and the middle class pays too much. So I have specific recommendations about how we're going to close those loopholes, make it clear that the wealthy will have to pay their fair share, and have a series of tax cuts for middle-class families. 
And I want to do more to help us balance family and work. I believe in equal pay for equal work for women, but I also believe it's about time we had paid family leave for American families and join the rest of the world. [applause] 
During the course of the evening tonight, I'll have a chance to lay out all of my plans and the work that I've done behind them. But for me, this is about bringing our country together again. And I will do everything I can to heal the divides — the divides economically, because there's too much inequality; the racial divides; the continuing discrimination against the LGBT community — so that we work together and, yes, finally, fathers will be able to say to their daughters, you, too, can grow up to be president. [applause] 

COOPER: Thank you, all. It is time to start the debate. 
Are you all ready? [applause] 
All right. Let's begin. We're going to be discussing a lot of the issues, many of the issues, important issues that you have brought up. But I want to begin with concerns that voters have about each of the candidates here on this stage that they have about each of you. 
Secretary Clinton, I want to start with you. Plenty of politicians evolve on issues, but even some Democrats believe you change your positions based on political expediency. 
You were against same-sex marriage. Now you're for it. You defended President Obama's immigration policies. Now you say they're too harsh. You supported his trade deal dozen of times. You even called it the "gold standard". Now, suddenly, last week, you're against it. 
Will you say anything to get elected? 

CLINTON: Well, actually, I have been very consistent. Over the course of my entire life, I have always fought for the same values and principles, but, like most human beings — including those of us who run for office — I do absorb new information. I do look at what's happening in the world. 
You know, take the trade deal. I did say, when I was secretary of state, three years ago, that I hoped it would be the gold standard. It was just finally negotiated last week, and in looking at it, it didn't meet my standards. My standards for more new, good jobs for Americans, for raising wages for Americans. 
And I want to make sure that I can look into the eyes of any middle-class American and say, "this will help raise your wages." And I concluded I could not. 

COOPER: Secretary Clinton, though, with all due respect, the question is really about political expediency. Just in July, New Hampshire, you told the crowd you'd, quote, "take a back seat to no one when it comes to progressive values." 
Last month in Ohio, you said you plead guilty to, quote, "being kind of moderate and center." Do you change your political identity based on who you're talking to? 

CLINTON: No. I think that, like most people that I know, I have a range of views, but they are rooted in my values and my experience. And I don't take a back seat to anyone when it comes to progressive experience and progressive commitment. 
You know, when I left law school, my first job was with the Children's Defense Fund, and for all the years since, I have been focused on how we're going to un-stack the deck, and how we're gonna make it possible for more people to have the experience I had. 
You know, to be able to come from a grandfather who was a factory worker, a father who was a small business person, and now asking the people of America to elect me president. 
COOPER: Just for the record, are you a progressive, or are you a moderate? 
CLINTON: I'm a progressive. But I'm a progressive who likes to get things done. And I know... [applause] ...how to find common ground, and I know how to stand my ground, and I have proved that in every position that I've had, even dealing with Republicans who never had a good word to say about me, honestly. But we found ways to work together on everything from...
COOPER: Secretary...
CLINTON: ...reforming foster care and adoption to the Children's Health Insurance Program, which insures...

COOPER: ...thank you...
CLINTON: ...8 million kids. So I have a long history of getting things done, rooted in the same values... 

COOPER: ...Senator... 

CLINTON: ...I've always had. 

COOPER: Senator Sanders. A Gallup poll says half the country would not put a socialist in the White House. You call yourself a democratic socialist. How can any kind of socialist win a general election in the United States? 
SANDERS: Well, we're gonna win because first, we're gonna explain what democratic socialism is. 
And what democratic socialism is about is saying that it is immoral and wrong that the top one-tenth of 1 percent in this country own almost 90 percent — almost — own almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. That it is wrong, today, in a rigged economy, that 57 percent of all new income is going to the top 1 percent. 
That when you look around the world, you see every other major country providing health care to all people as a right, except the United States. You see every other major country saying to moms that, when you have a baby, we're not gonna separate you from your newborn baby, because we are going to have — we are gonna have medical and family paid leave, like every other country on Earth. 
Those are some of the principles that I believe in, and I think we should look to countries like Denmark, like Sweden and Norway, and learn from what they have accomplished for their working people. [applause] 

COOPER: Denmark is a country that has a population — Denmark is a country that has a population of 5.6 million people. The question is really about electability here, and that's what I'm trying to get at. 
You — the — the Republican attack ad against you in a general election — it writes itself. You supported the Sandinistas in Nicaragua. You honeymooned in the Soviet Union. And just this weekend, you said you're not a capitalist. 
Doesn't — doesn't that ad write itself? 

SANDERS: Well, first of all, let's look at the facts. The facts that are very simple. Republicans win when there is a low voter turnout, and that is what happened last November. 
Sixty-three percent of the American people didn't vote, Anderson. Eighty percent of young people didn't vote. We are bringing out huge turnouts, and creating excitement all over this country. 
Democrats at the White House on down will win, when there is excitement and a large voter turnout, and that is what this campaign is doing. 
COOPER : You don't consider yourself a capitalist, though? 

SANDERS : Do I consider myself part of the casino capitalist process by which so few have so much and so many have so little by which Wall Street's greed and recklessness wrecked this economy? No, I don't. I believe in a society where all people do well. Not just a handful of billionaires. [ applause ] 

COOPER : Just let me just be clear. Is there anybody else on the stage who is not a capitalist? 

CLINTON : Well, let me just follow-up on that, Anderson, because when I think about capitalism, I think about all the small businesses that were started because we have the opportunity and the freedom in our country for people to do that and to make a good living for themselves and their families. And I don't think we should confuse what we have to do every so often in America, which is save capitalism from itself. And I think what Senator Sanders is saying certainly makes sense in the terms of the inequality that we have. But we are not Denmark. I love Denmark. We are the United States of America. And it's our job to rein in the excesses of capitalism so that it doesn't run amok and doesn't cause the kind of inequities we're seeing in our economic system. But we would be making a grave mistake to turn our backs on what built the greatest middle class in the history... 

COOPER : Senator Sanders? 

CLINTON : ...of the world. [ applause ] 

SANDERS : I think everybody is in agreement that we are a great entrepreneurial nation. We have got to encourage that. Of course, we have to support small and medium-sized businesses. But you can have all of the growth that you want and it doesn't mean anything if all of the new income and wealth is going to the top 1 percent. So what we need to do is support small and medium-sized businesses , the backbone of our economy, but we have to make sure that every family in this country gets a fair shake... 

COOPER : We're going to get... 

SANDERS : ...not just for billionaires. 

COOPER : We're going to have a lot more on these issues. But I do want to just quickly get everybody in on the question of electability. Governor Chafee, you've been everything but a socialist. When you were senator from Rhode Island, you were a Republican. When you were elected governor, you were an independent. You've only been a Democrat for little more than two years. Why should Democratic voters trust you won't change again? 
CHAFEE : Anderson, you're looking at a block of granite when it comes to the issues. Whether it's... [ crosstalk ] 

COOPER : It seems like pretty soft granite. I mean, you've been a Republican, you've been an independent. 

CHAFEE : Did you hear what I said? On the issues. I have not changed on the issues. I was a liberal Republican, then I was an independent, and now I'm a proud Democrat. But I have not changed on the issues. And I open my record to scrutiny. Whether it's on the environment, a woman's right to choose, gay marriage, fiscal responsibility, aversion to foreign entanglements, using the tools of government to help the less fortunate. Time and time again, I have never changed. You're looking at a block of granite when it comes to the issues. So I have not changed.

COOPER : Then why change labels? 

CHAFEE : The party left me. There's no doubt about that. There was no room for a liberal moderate Republican in that party. I even had a primary for my reelection in 2006. I won it. But the money poured in to defeat me in Rhode Island as a Republican. That's what we were up against. 
COOPER: Governor O'Malley, the concern of voters about you is that you tout our record as Baltimore's mayor. As we all know, we all saw it. That city exploded in riots and violence in April. 
The current top prosecutor in Baltimore, also a Democrat, blames your zero tolerance policies for sowing the seeds of unrest. Why should Americans trust you with the country when they see what's going on in the city that you ran for more than seven years? 
O'MALLEY: Yes, actually, I believe what she said was that there's a lot of policies that have led to this unrest. 
But, Anderson, when I ran for mayor of Baltimore in 1999... 
COOPER: She actually — just for the record, when she was asked which policies, to name two, she said zero tolerance. I mean, there's a number of old policies that we're seeing the results of. That distress of communities, where communities don't want to step forward and say who killed a 3-year-old, it's a direct result of these failed policies. 
O'MALLEY: Well, let's talk about this a little bit. One of the things that was not reported during that heartbreaking night of unrest in Baltimore was that arrests had actually fallen to a 38-year low in the year prior to the Freddie Gray's tragic death. 
Anderson, when I ran for mayor of Baltimore back in 1999, it was not because our city was doing well. It was because we allowed ourselves to become the most violent, addicted, and abandoned city in America. 
And I ran and promised people that together we could turn that around. And we put our city on a path to reduce violent crime, or part one (ph) crime by more than any other major city in America over the next 10 years. 
I did not make our city immune to setbacks. But I attended a lot of funerals, including one for a family of seven who were firebombed in their sleep for picking up the phone in a poor African-American neighborhood and calling the police because of drug dealers on their corner. 
We've saved over a thousand lives in Baltimore in the last 15 years of people working together. And the vast majority of them were young and poor and black. It wasn't easy on any day. But we saved lives and we gave our city a better future, improving police and community relations every single day that I was in office. 
COOPER: In one year alone, though, 100,000 arrests were made in your city, a city of 640,000 people. The ACLU, the NAACP sued you, sued the city, and the city actually settled, saying a lot of those arrests were without probable cause. 
O'MALLEY: Well, I think the key word in your followup there was the word "settle." That's true. It was settled. Arrests peaked in 2003, Anderson, but they declined every year after that as we restored peace in our poorer neighborhoods so that people could actually walk and not have to worry about their kids or their loved ones of being victims of violent crime. 
Look, none of this is easy. None of us has all the answers. But together as a city, we saved a lot of lives. It was about leadership. It was about principle. And it was about bringing people together. 
COOPER : Thank you, Governor.

O'MALLEY : Thank you.

COOPER
 : Senator Webb, in 2006, you called affirmative action 
``state-sponsored racism.'' In 2010, you wrote an op/ed saying it 
discriminates against whites. Given that nearly half the Democratic 
Party is non-white, aren't you out of step with where the Democratic 
Party is now?

WEBB : No, actually I believe that I am where the 
Democratic Party traditionally has been. The Democratic Party, and the 
reason I've decided to run as a Democrat, has been the party that gives 
people who otherwise have no voice in the corridors of power a voice. 
And that is not determined by race. And as a clarification, I have 
always supported affirmative action for African Americans. That's the 
way the program was originally designed because of their unique history 
in this country, with slavery and the Jim Crow laws that followed. What I
 have discussed a number of times is the idea that when we create 
diversity programs that include everyone, quote, ``of color,'' other 
than whites, struggling whites like the families in the Appalachian 
mountains, we're not being true to the Democratic Party principle of 
elevating the level of consciousness among our people about the 
hardships that a lot of people who happen to be have - by culture, by 
the way.

COOPER : Senator Webb, thank you very much. Let's move 
on to some of the most pressing issues facing our country right now, 
some of the biggest issues right now in the headlines today. We're going
 to start with guns. The shooting in Oregon earlier this month, once 
again it brought the issue of guns into the national conversation. Over 
the last week, guns have been the most discussed political topic on 
Facebook by two to one. Senator Sanders, you voted against the Brady 
bill that mandated background checks and a waiting period. You also 
supported allowing riders to bring guns in checked bags on Amtrak 
trains. For a decade, you said that holding gun manufacturers legally 
responsible for mass shootings is a bad idea. Now, you say you're 
reconsidering that. Which is it: shield the gun companies from lawsuits 
or not?

SANDERS : Let's begin, Anderson, by understanding that 
Bernie Sanders has a D-minus voting rating (ph) from the NRA. Let's also
 understand that back in 1988 when I first ran for the United States 
Congress, way back then, I told the gun owners of the state of Vermont 
and I told the people of the state of Vermont, a state which has 
virtually no gun control, that I supported a ban on assault weapons. And
 over the years, I have strongly avoided instant background checks, 
doing away with this terrible gun show loophole. And I think we've got 
to move aggressively at the federal level in dealing with the straw man 
purchasers. Also I believe, and I've fought for, to understand that 
there are thousands of people in this country today who are suicidal, 
who are homicidal, but can't get the healthcare that they need, the 
mental healthcare, because they don't have insurance or they're too 
poor. I believe that everybody in this country who has a mental crisis 
has got to get mental health counseling immediately.

COOPER : Do you want to shield gun companies from lawsuits?

SANDERS
 : Of course not. This was a large and complicated bill. There were 
provisions in it that I think made sense. For example, do I think that a
 gun shop in the state of Vermont that sells legally a gun to somebody, 
and that somebody goes out and does something crazy, that that gun shop 
owner should be held responsible? I don't. On the other hand, where you 
have manufacturers and where you have gun shops knowingly giving guns to
 criminals or aiding and abetting that, of course we should take action.

COOPER : Secretary Clinton, is Bernie Sanders tough enough on guns?

CLINTON
 : No, not at all. I think that we have to look at the fact that we lose
 90 people a day from gun violence. This has gone on too long and it 's 
time the entire country stood up against the NRA. The majority of our 
country ... [ applause ] ... supports background checks, and even the 
majority of gun owners do. Senator Sanders did vote five times against 
the Brady bill. Since it was passed, more than 2 million prohibited 
purchases have been prevented. He also did vote, as he said, for this 
immunity provision. I voted against it. I was in the Senate at the same 
time. It wasn't that complicated to me. It was pretty straightforward to
 me that he was going to give immunity to the only industry in America. 
Everybody else has to be accountable, but not the gun manufacturers. And
 we need to stand up and say: Enough of that. We 're not going to let it
 continue. [ applause ]

COOPER : We're going to bring you all in on this. But, Senator Sanders, you have to give a response.

SANDERS
 : As a senator from a rural state, what I can tell Secretary Clinton, 
that all the shouting in the world is not going to do what I would hope 
all of us want, and that is keep guns out of the hands of people who 
should not have those guns and end this horrible violence that we are 
seeing. I believe that there is a consensus in this country. A consensus
 has said we need to strengthen and expand instant background checks, do
 away with this gun show loophole, that we have to address the issue of 
mental health, that we have to deal with the strawman purchasing issue, 
and that when we develop that consensus, we can finally, finally do 
something to address this issue.

COOPER : Governor O'Malley, you 
passed gun legislation as governor of Maryland, but you had a 
Democratic-controlled legislature. President Obama couldn't convince 
Congress to pass gun legislation after the massacres in Aurora, in 
Newtown, and Charleston. How can you?

O'MALLEY : And, Anderson, I
 also had to overcome a lot of opposition in the leadership of my own 
party to get this done. Look, it's fine to talk about all of these 
things - and I'm glad we're talking about these things - but I've 
actually done them. We passed comprehensive gun safety legislation, not 
by looking at the pollings or looking at what the polls said. We 
actually did it. And, Anderson, here tonight in our audience are two 
people that make this issue very, very real. Sandy and Lonnie Phillips 
are here from Colorado. And their daughter, Jessie, was one of those who
 lost their lives in that awful mass shooting in Aurora. Now, to try to 
transform their grief, they went to court, where sometimes progress does
 happen when you file in court, but in this case, you want to talk about
 a - a rigged game, Senator? The game was rigged. A man had sold 4,000 
rounds of military ammunition to this - this person that killed their 
daughter, riddled her body with five bullets, and he didn't even ask 
where it was going. And not only did their case get thrown out of court,
 they were slapped with $200,000 in court fees because of the way that 
the NRA gets its way in our Congress and we take a backseat. It's time 
to stand up and pass comprehensive gun safety legislation as a nation. [
 applause ]COOPER : Senator Sanders , I want you to be able to respond , 30 seconds . 
SANDERS : I think the governor gave a very good example about the weaknesses in that law and I think we have to take another look at it . But here is the point , Governor . We can raise our voices , but I come from a rural state , and the views on gun control in rural states are different than in urban states , whether we like it or not . Our job is to bring people together around strong , commonsense gun legislation . I think there is a vast majority in this country who want to do the right thing , and I intend to lead the country in bringing our people together . 
O'MALLEY : Senator — Senator , excuse me . [ crosstalk ]
O'MALLEY : Senator , it is not about rural — Senator , it was not about rural and urban . 
SANDERS : It 's exactly about rural .
O'MALLEY : Have you ever been to the Eastern Shore ? Have you ever been to Western Maryland ? We were able to pass this and still respect the hunting traditions of people who live in our rural areas . 
SANDERS : Governor ... 
O'MALLEY : And we did it by leading with principle , not by pandering to the NRA and backing down to the NRA . 
SANDERS : Well , as somebody who has a D-minus voting record ... [ crosstalk ] 
O'MALLEY : And I have an F from the NRA , Senator . 
SANDERS : I do n't think I am pandering . But you have not been in the United States Congress . 
O'MALLEY : Well , maybe that 's a healthy thing . [ laughter ]
 SANDERS : And when you want to , check it out . And if you think — if you think that we can simply go forward and pass something tomorrow without bringing people together , you are sorely mistaken . 
COOPER : Let me bring in somebody who has a different viewpoint . Senator Webb , your rating from the NRA , you once had an A rating from the NRA . You 've said gun violence goes down when more people are allowed to carry guns . Would encouraging more people to be armed be part of your response to a mass shooting ? 
WEBB : Look , there are two fundamental issues that are involved in this discussion . We need to pay respect to both of them . The first is the issue of who should be kept from having guns and using firearms . And we have done not a good job on that . A lot of them are criminals . And a lot of the people are getting killed are members of gangs inside our urban areas . And a lot of them are mentally incapacitated . And the shooting in Virginia Tech in '07 , this individual had received medical care for mental illness from three different professionals who were not allowed to share the information . So we do need background checks . We need to keep the people who should not have guns away from them . But we have to respect the tradition in this country of people who want to defend themselves and their family from violence . 
COOPER : Senator ... 
WEBB : May I ? People are going back and forth here for 10 minutes here . There are people at high levels in this government who have bodyguards 24 hours a day , seven days a week . The average American does not have that , and deserves the right to be able to protect their family . 
COOPER : Senator — Governor Chafee , you have an F rating from the NRA , what do you think about what Senator Webb just said ? 
CHAFEE : Yes , I have a good record of voting for gun commonsense safety legislation , but the reality is , despite these tragedies that happen time and time again , when legislators step up to pass commonsense gun safety legislation , the gun lobby moves in and tells the people they 're coming to take away your guns . And , they 're successful at it , in Colorado and others states , the legislators that vote for commonsense gun safety measures then get defeated . I even saw in Rhode Island . So , I would bring the gun lobby in and say we 've got to change this . Where can we find common ground ? Wayne Lapierre from the NRA , whoever it is , the leaders . Come one , we 've go to change this . We 're not coming to take away your guns , we believe in the Second Amendment , but let 's find common ground here . 
COOPER : I want to ... 
O'MALLEY : ... Anderson , when the NRA wrote to everyone in our state — when the NRA wrote to members in our state and told people with hunting traditions lies about what our comprehensive gun safety legislation is , I wrote right back to them and laid out what it actually did . And that 's why , not only did we pass it , but the NRA did n't dare to petition a referendum Because we built a public consensus 
COOPER : ... I want to move on to another issue , which is in the headlines right now , another crisis making headlines . Secretary Clinton , Russia , they 're challenging the U.S. in Syria . According to U.S. intelligence , they 've lied about who they 're bombing . You spearheaded the reset with Russia . Did you underestimate the Russians , and as president , what would your response to Vladimir Putin be right now in Syria ? 
CLINTON : Well , first of all , we got a lot of business done with the Russians when Medvedev was the president , and not Putin . We got a nuclear arms deal , we got the Iranian sanctions , we got an ability to bring important material and equipment to our soldiers in Afghanistan . There 's no doubt that when Putin came back in and said he was going to be President , that did change the relationship . We have to stand up to his bullying , and specifically in Syria , it is important — and I applaud the administration because they are engaged in talks right now with the Russians to make it clear that they 've got to be part of the solution to try to end that bloody conflict . And , to — provide safe zones so that people are not going to have to be flooding out of Syria at the rate they are . And , I think it 's important too that the United States make it very clear to Putin that it 's not acceptable for him to be in Syria creating more chaos , bombing people on behalf of Assad , and we ca n't do that if we do n't take more of a leadership position , which is what I 'm advocating . 
COOPER : Senator Sanders , what would you do differently . 
SANDERS : Well , let 's understand that when we talk about Syria , you 're talking about a quagmire in a quagmire . You 're talking about groups of people trying to overthrow Assad , other groups of people fighting ISIS . You 're talking about people who are fighting ISIS using their guns to overthrow Assad , and vice versa . I 'm the former chairman of the Senate Veterans Committee , and in that capacity I learned a very powerful lesson about the cost of war , and I will do everything that I can to make sure that the United States does not get involved in another quagmire like we did in Iraq , the worst foreign policy blunder in the history of this country . We should be putting together a coalition of Arab countries who should be leading the effort . We should be supportive , but I do not support American ground troops in Syria . COOPER : I want to go to Dana Bash . Dana ? BASH : Governor Chafee , you were the only Republican in the Senate to vote against the Iraq war . You say Secretary Clinton should be disqualified from the presidency because she voted in favor of using force in Iraq . She has since said that her vote was a mistake . Why is n't that good enough ? CHAFEE : Well , we just heard Senator Sanders say that it 's the worst decision in American history . That 's very significant , the worst decision in American history , I just heard from Senator Sanders . So , as we look ahead , if you 're going to make those poor judgment calls , a critical time in our history , we just finished with the Vietnam era , getting back into another quagmire — if you 're looking ahead , and you 're looking at someone who made that poor decision in 2002 to go into Iraq when there was no real evidence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq — I know because I did my homework , and , so , that 's an indication of how someone will perform in the future . And that 's what 's important . [ applause ] BASH : Secretary Clinton , he 's questioning your judgment . CLINTON : Well , I recall very well being on a debate stage , I think , about 25 times with then Senator Obama , debating this very issue . After the election , he asked me to become Secretary of State . He valued my judgment , and I spent a lot of time with him ... [ applause ] ... in the Situation Room , going over some very difficult issues . You know , I — I agree completely . We do n't want American troops on the ground in Syria . I never said that . What I said was we had to put together a coalition — in fact , something that I worked on before I left the State Department — to do , and yes , that it should include Arabs , people in the region . Because what I worry about is what will happen with ISIS gaining more territory , having more reach , and , frankly , posing a threat to our friends and neighbors in the region and far beyond . So I think while you 're talking about the tough decision that President Obama had to make about Osama bin Laden , where I was one of his few advisers , or putting together that coalition to impose sanctions on Iran — I think I have a lot of evidence ... [ crosstalk ] BASH : Senator Sanders — Senator Sanders , I want to bring you in here . My question for you is , as a congressman , you voted against the Iraq War . You voted against the Gulf War . You 're just talking about Syria , but under what circumstances would a President Sanders actually use force ? SANDERS : Let me just respond to something the secretary said . First of all , she is talking about , as I understand it , a no-fly zone in Syria , which I think is a very dangerous situation . Could lead to real problems . Second of all , I heard the same evidence from President Bush and Dick Cheney and Don Rumsfeld about why we should overthrow Saddam Hussein and get involved in the — I would urge people to go to berniesanders.com , hear what I said in 2002 . And I say , without any joy in my heart , that much of what I thought would happen about the destabilization , in fact , did happen . So I think ... BASH : All right . [ applause ] SANDERS : I think the president is trying very hard to thread a tough needle here , and that is to support those people who are against Assad , against ISIS , without getting us on the ground there , and that 's the direction I believe we should have ( inaudible ) . COOPER : But , Senator Sanders , you did n't answer the question . Under what — under what circumstances would you actually use force ? SANDERS : Well , obviously , I voted , when President Clinton said , `` let 's stop ethnic cleansing in Kosovo , '' I voted for that . I voted to make sure that Osama bin Laden was held accountable in Afghanistan . When our country is threatened , or when our allies are threatened , I believe that we need coalitions to come together to address the major crises of this country . I do not support the United States getting involved in unilateral action . ( UNKNOWN ) : You 're at work with our allies . [ crosstalk ] COOPER : I 'm gon na bring you all in on this . Governor — Governor O'Malley , Secretary Clinton ... SANDERS : I do n't believe that any ... [ crosstalk ] COOPER : Secretary Clinton voted to authorize military force in Iraq , supported more troops in Afghanistan . As Secretary of State , she wanted to arm Syrian rebels and push for the bombing of Libya . Is she too quick to use military force ? O'MALLEY : Anderson , no president — no commander in chief — should take the military option off the table , even if most of us would agree that it should be the last option . What disturbed people so much about — and I would agree with Senator Sanders on this — leading us into Iraq under false pretenses and telling us , as a people , that there were weapons of mass destruction there was — was one of the worst blunders in modern American history . But the reason why people remain angry about it is because people feel like a lot of our legislators got railroaded in a war fever and by polls . And I remember being at a dinner shortly before that invasion . People were talking at — and saying , `` it 'll take us just a couple years to rebuild democracy , '' and I thought , `` has this world gone mad ? '' Whenever we go — and contrary to John Quincy Adams ' advice — `` searching the world for monsters to destroy , '' and when we use political might to take a — at the expense of democratic principle , we hurt ourselves , and we hurt our [ inaudible ] . COOPER : Does she — does she want to use military force too rapidly ? O'MALLEY : I believe that , as president , I would not be so quick to pull for a military tool . I believe that a no-fly zone in Syria , at this time , actually , Secretary , would be a mistake . You have to enforce no-fly zones , and I believe , especially with the Russian air force in the air , it could lead to an escalation because of an accident that we would deeply regret . I support President Obama . I think we have to play a long game , and I think , ultimately — you want to talk about blunders ? I think Assad 's invasion of Syria will be seen as a blunder . COOPER : Governor O'Malley , just for the record , on the campaign trail , you 've been saying that Secretary Clinton is always quick for the — for the military intervention . Senator — Secretary Clinton , you can respond . CLINTON : Well , first of all , I ... WEBB : Anderson , can I come into this discussion at some point ? COOPER : Well — yes , you 'll be coming in next , but she was directly quoted , Senator . WEBB : Thank you . I 've been standing over here for about ten minutes , trying . COOPER : OK. WEBB : It 's just — it 's gone back and forth over there . COOPER : Secretary ? CLINTON : Well , I am in the middle , here , and ... [ laughter ] Lots of things coming from all directions . WEBB : You got the lucky [ inaudible ] .CLINTON : You know , I have to say , I was very pleased when Governor O'Malley endorsed me for president in 2008 , and I enjoyed his strong support in that campaign . And I consider him , obviously , a friend . Let me say — because there 's a lot of loose talk going on here — we are already flying in Syria just as we are flying in Iraq . The president has made a very tough decision . What I believe and why I have advocated that the no-fly zone — which of course would be in a coalition — be put on the table is because I 'm trying to figure out what leverage we have to get Russia to the table . You know , diplomacy is not about getting to the perfect solution . It 's about how you balance the risks . COOPER : Thank you . CLINTON : And I think we have an opportunity here — and I know that inside the administration this is being hotly debated — to get that leverage to try to get the Russians to have to deal with everybody in the region and begin to move toward a political , diplomatic solution in Syria . COOPER : Thank you , Secretary . [ crosstalk ] COOPER : Senator Webb , you said as president you would never have used military force in Libya and that the attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi was , in your words , `` inevitable . '' Should Secretary Clinton have seen that attack coming ? WEBB : Look , let 's start — I 've been trying to get in this conversation for about 10 minutes — let 's start with why Russia is in Syria right now . There are three strategic failings that have allowed this to occur . The first was the invasion of Iraq , which destabilized ethnic elements in Iraq and empowered Iran . The second was the Arab Spring , which created huge vacuums in Libya and in Syria that allowed terrorist movements to move in there . And the third was the recent deal allowing Iran to move forward and eventually acquire a nuclear weapon , which sent bad signals , bad body language into the region about whether we are acquiescing in Iran becoming a stronger piece of the formula in that part of the world . Now , I say this as someone who spent five years in the Pentagon and who opposed the war in Iraq , whose son fought in Iraq , I 've fought in Vietnam . But if you want a place where we need to be in terms of our national strategy , a focus , the greatest strategic threat that we have right now is resolving our relationship with China . And we need to do this because of their aggression in the region . We need to do it because of the way they treat their own people . COOPER : Senator ... WEBB : And I would say this . I 've been waiting for 10 minutes . I will say this . 
COOPER: You're over your time as of now. 

WEBB: I will — well, you've let a lot of people go over their time. I would say this... 

COOPER: You agreed to these debate rules. 

WEBB: ... to the unelected, authoritarian government of China: You do not own the South China Sea. You do not have the right to conduct cyber warfare against tens of millions of American citizens. And in a Webb administration, we will do something about that. 

COOPER: Senator Sanders, I want you to be able to respond. 

SANDERS: Pardon me? 

COOPER: I'd like you to be able to respond and get in on this. 

SANDERS: Well, I think Mr. Putin is going to regret what he is doing. I think that when he gets into that... 

COOPER: He doesn't seem to be the type of guy to regret a lot. 

SANDERS: Well, I think he's already regretting what he did in Crimea and what he is doing in the Ukraine. I think he is really regretting the decline of his economy. And I think what he is trying to do now is save some face. But I think when Russians get killed in Syria and when he gets bogged down, I think the Russian people are going to give him a message that maybe they should come home, maybe they should start working with the United States to rectify the situation now. 
COOPER : Secretary Clinton , on the campaign trail , Governor Webb has said that he would never have used military force in Libya and that the attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi was inevitable . Should you have seen that attack coming ? CLINTON : Well , let 's remember what was going on . We had a murderous dictator , Gadhafi , who had American blood on his hands , as I 'm sure you remember , threatening to massacre large numbers of the Libyan people . We had our closest allies in Europe burning up the phone lines begging us to help them try to prevent what they saw as a mass genocide , in their words . And we had the Arabs standing by our side saying , `` We want you to help us deal with Gadhafi . '' Our response , which I think was smart power at its best , is that the United States will not lead this . We will provide essential , unique capabilities that we have , but the Europeans and the Arabs had to be first over the line . We did not put one single American soldier on the ground in Libya . And I 'll say this for the Libyan people ... COOPER : But American citizens did lose their lives in Benghazi . CLINTON : But let — I 'll get to that . But I think it 's important , since I understand Senator Webb 's very strong feelings about this , to explain where we were then and to point out that I think President Obama made the right decision at the time . And the Libyan people had a free election the first time since 1951 . And you know what , they voted for moderates , they voted with the hope of democracy . Because of the Arab Spring , because of a lot of other things , there was turmoil to be followed . But unless you believe the United States should not send diplomats to any place that is dangerous , which I do not , then when we send them forth , there is always the potential for danger and risk . COOPER : Governor O'Malley ? WEBB : Can I ... [ crosstalk ] O'MALLEY : Anderson , I think we are learning ... [ crosstalk ] O'MALLEY : Anderson , I think there 's lessons to be learned from Benghazi . And those lessons are that we need to do a much better job as a nation of having human intelligence on the ground so that we know who the emerging next generation leaders are that are coming up to replace a dictator when his time on this planet ends . And I believe that 's what Chris Stevens was trying to do . But he did not have the tools . We have failed as a country to invest in the human intelligence that would allow us to make not only better decisions in Libya , but better decisions in Syria today . And it 's a huge national security failing . COOPER : Senator Webb , I want you to be able to respond . WEBB : Thank you . [ crosstalk ] COOPER : Senator Webb ? WEBB : This is not about Benghazi per se . To me it is the inevitability of something like Benghazi occurring in the way that we intervened in Libya . We had no treaties at risk . We had no Americans at risk . There was no threat of attack or imminent attack . There is plenty of time for a president to come to the Congress and request authority to use military force in that situation . I called for it on the Senate floor again and again . I called for it in Senate hearings . It is not a wise thing to do . And if people think it was a wise thing to do , try to get to the Tripoli airport today . You ca n't do it . COOPER : Secretary ( sic ) Webb , you served in Vietnam . You 're a marine . Once a marine , always a marine . You served as a marine in Vietnam . You 're a decorated war hero . You eventually became secretary of the navy . During the Vietnam War , the man standing next to you , Senator Sanders , applied for status as a conscientious objector . Given his history , can he serve as a credible commander-in-chief ? WEBB : Everybody makes their decisions when the time there is conscription . And as long as they go through the legal process that our country requires , I respect that . And it would be for the voters to decide whether Senator Sanders or anyone else should be president . I will say this , coming from the position that I 've come from , from a military family , with my brother a marine , my son was a marine in Iraq , I served as a marine , spending five years in the Pentagon , I am comfortable that I am the most qualified person standing up here today to be your commander-in-chief . COOPER : Senator Sanders , tell an American soldier who is watching right now tonight in Afghanistan why you can be commander-in- chief given that you applied for conscientious objector status . SANDERS : Well , first of all , let me applaud my good friend Jim Webb for his service to this country in so many ways . [ applause ] Jim and I , under Jim 's leadership , as he indicated , passed the most significant veterans education bill in recent history . We followed suit with a few years later passing , under my leadership , the most significant veterans ' health care legislation in the modern history of this country . [ applause ] When I was a young man — I 'm not a young man today . When I was a young man , I strongly opposed the war in Vietnam . Not the brave men like Jim who fought in that war , but the policy which got us involved in that war . That was my view then . [ cheering and applause ] I am not a pacifist , Anderson . I supported the war in Afghanistan . I supported President Clinton 's effort to deal with ethnic cleansing in Kosovo . I support air strikes in Syria and what the president is trying to do . Yes , I happen to believe from the bottom of my heart that war should be the last resort that we have got to exercise diplomacy . But yes , I am prepared to take this country into war if that is necessary . [ crosstalk ] COOPER : Very quickly , 30 seconds for each of you . Governor Chafee , who or what is the greatest national security threat to the United States ? I want to go down the line . CHAFEE : OK . I just have to answer one thing that Senator Webb said about the Iran deal , because I 'm a strong proponent of what President Obama — and he said that because of that the Iran deal that enabled Russia to come in . No , that 's not true , Senator Webb . I respect your foreign policy chops . But Russia is aligned with Iran and with Assad and the Alawite Shias in Syria . So that Iran deal did not allow Russia to come in . COOPER : OK . Senator , I can give you 30 seconds to respond . WEBB : I believe that the signal that we sent to the region when the Iran nuclear deal was concluded was that we are accepting Iran 's greater position on this very important balance of power , among our greatest ally Israel , and the Sunnis represented by the Saudi regime , and Iran . It was a position of weakness and I think it encouraged the acts that we 've seen in the past several weeks . 
COOPER: Thirty seconds for each of you. Governor Chafee, what is the greatest national security threat to the United States? 
CHAFEE: It's certainly the chaos in the Middle East. There's no doubt about it. 
COOPER: OK. 
CHAFEE: And it all started with the Iraq invasion. 
COOPER: Governor O'Malley? 
O'MALLEY: I believe that nuclear Iran remains the biggest threat, along with the threat of ISIL; climate change, of course, makes cascading threats even more (inaudible). 
COOPER: Secretary Clinton, the greatest national security threat? 
CLINTON: I — I think it has to be continued threat from the spread of nuclear weapons, nuclear material that can fall into the wrong hands. I know the terrorists are constantly seeking it, and that's why we have to stay vigilant, but also united around the world to prevent that. 
COOPER: Senator Sanders, greatest national security threat? 
SANDERS: The scientific community is telling us that if we do not address the global crisis of climate change, transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to sustainable energy, the planet that we're going to be leaving our kids and our grandchildren may well not be habitable. That is a major crisis. 
COOPER: Senator Webb? 
WEBB: Our greatest long-term strategic challenge is our relation with China. Our greatest day-to-day threat is cyber warfare against this country. Our greatest military-operational threat is resolving the situations in the Middle East. 
COOPER : All right . We 're going to take a short break . Do these candidates see eye to eye on an issue that is driving a big wedge between Republicans ? That is next . We 'll be right back . [ applause ] [ commercial break ] 
COOPER : And welcome back . We are live in Nevada , in Las Vegas , at the Wynn Resort for the first Democratic presidential debate . The questions continue . We begin with Secretary Clinton . Secretary Clinton , you are going to be testifying before Congress next week about your e-mails . For the last eight months , you have n't been able to put this issue behind you . You dismissed it ; you joked about it ; you called it a mistake . What does that say about your ability to handle far more challenging crises as president ? 
CLINTON : Well , I 've taken responsibility for it . I did say it was a mistake . What I did was allowed by the State Department , but it was n't the best choice . And I have been as transparent as I know to be , turning over 55,000 pages of my e-mails , asking that they be made public . And you 're right . I am going to be testifying . I 've been asking to testify for some time and to do it in public , which was not originally agreed to . But let 's just take a minute here and point out that this committee is basically an arm of the Republican National Committee . [ applause ] It is a partisan vehicle , as admitted by the House Republican majority leader , Mr. McCarthy , to drive down my poll numbers . Big surprise . And that 's what they have attempted to do . I am still standing . I am happy to be part of this debate . [ applause ] And I intend to keep talking about the issues that matter to the American people . You know , I believe strongly that we need to be talking about what people talk to me about , like how are we going to make college affordable ? How are we going to pay down student debt ? 
COOPER : Secretary ... CLINTON : How are we going to get health care for everybody ... [ crosstalk ] 
COOPER : Secretary Clinton , Secretary Clinton , with all due respect , it 's a little hard — I mean , is n't it a little bit hard to call this just a partisan issue ? There 's an FBI investigation , and President Obama himself just two days ago said this is a legitimate issue . CLINTON : Well , I never said it was n't legitimate . I said that I have answered all the questions and I will certainly be doing so again before this committee . But I think it would be really unfair not to look at the entire picture . This committee has spent $ 4.5 million of taxpayer money , and they said that they were trying to figure out what we could do better to protect our diplomats so that something like Benghazi would n't happen again . There were already seven committee reports about what to do . So I think it 's pretty clear what their obvious goal is . 
COOPER : Thank you . 
CLINTON : But I 'll be there . I 'll answer their questions . But tonight , I want to talk not about my e-mails , but about what the American people want from the next president of the United States . [ applause ] 
COOPER : Senator Sanders ? 
SANDERS : Let me say this . [ applause ] Let me say — let me say something that may not be great politics . But I think the secretary is right , and that is that the American people are sick and tired of hearing about your damn e-mails . [ applause ] 
CLINTON : Thank you . Me , too . Me , too . 
SANDERS : You know ? The middle class — Anderson , and let me say something about the media , as well . I go around the country , talk to a whole lot of people . Middle class in this country is collapsing . We have 27 million people living in poverty . We have massive wealth and income inequality . Our trade policies have cost us millions of decent jobs . The American people want to know whether we 're going to have a democracy or an oligarchy as a result of Citizens Union . Enough of the e-mails . Let 's talk about the real issues facing America . [ applause ] CLINTON : Thank you , Bernie . Thank you . [ applause ] 
COOPER : It 's obviously very popular in this crowd , and it 's — hold on . [ applause ] I know that plays well in this room . But I got to be honest , Governor Chafee , for the record , on the campaign trail , you 've said a different thing . You said this is a huge issue . Standing here in front of Secretary Clinton , are you willing to say that to her face ? 
CHAFEE : Absolutely . We have to repair American credibility after we told the world that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction , which he did n't . So there 's an issue of American credibility out there . So any time someone is running to be our leader , and a world leader , which the American president is , credibility is an issue out there with the world . And we have repair work to be done . I think we need someone that has the best in ethical standards as our next president . That 's how I feel .
COOPER : Secretary Clinton , do you want to respond ? 

CLINTON : No . COOPER: Governor — Governor... [applause] 
Governor O'Malley... [applause] 
Governor, it's popular in the room, but a lot of people do want to know these answers. 
Governor O'Malley, you expressed concern on the campaign trail that the Democratic Party is, and I quote, "being defined by Hillary Clinton's email scandal." 
You heard her answer, do you still feel that way tonight? 
O'MALLEY: I believe that now that we're finally having debates, Anderson, that we don't have to be defined by the email scandal, and how long — what the FBI's asking about. Instead, we can talk about affordable college, making college debt free, and all the issues. Which is why — and I see the chair of the DNC here, look how glad we are actually to be talking about the issues that matter the most to people around the kitchen table. 
We need to get wages to go up, college more affordable... 
COOPER: ...Thank you, governor. 
O'MALLEY: ...we need to make American 100 percent clean electric by 2050. 
COOPER: I want to talk about issues of race in America, for that I want to start of with Don Lemon. 
LEMON: Alright, Anderson, thank you very much. I'm not sure how to follow that, but this question is about something that has tripped some of the candidates up out on the campaign trail. Can you hear me? 
Can't hear me in the room. OK, here we go again, as I said... 
WILKINS: ...law school. My question for the candidates is, do black lives matter, or do all lives matter? 
COOPER: The question from Arthur... 
LEMON: ...There we go... 
COOPER: ...Do black lives matter, or do all lives matter? Let's put that question to Senator Sanders. 
SANDERS: Black lives matter. [cheering] And the reason — the reason those words matter is the African American community knows that on any given day some innocent person like Sandra Bland can get into a car, and then three days later she's going to end up dead in jail, or their kids are going to get shot. We need to combat institutional racism from top to bottom, and we need major, major reforms in a broken criminal justice system In which we have more people in jail than China. And, I intended to tackle that issue. To make sure that our people have education and jobs rather than jail cells. [applause] 
COOPER: Governor O'Malley, the question from Arthur was do black lives matter , or do all lives matter ? 
O'MALLEY: Anderson, the point that the Black Lives Matter movement is making is a very, very legitimate and serious point, and that is that as a nation we have undervalued the lives of black lives, people of color. 
When I ran for Mayor of Baltimore — and we we burying over 350 young men ever single year, mostly young, and poor, and black, and I said to our legislature, at the time when I appeared in front of them as a mayor, that if we were burying white, young, poor men in these number we would be marching in the streets and there would be a different reaction. 
Black lives matter , and we have a lot of work to do to reform our criminal justice system, and to address race relations in our country. [applause] 
COOPER: Secretary Clinton, what would you do for African Americans in this country that President Obama couldn't? 
CLINTON: Well, I think that President Obama has been a great moral leader on these issues, and has laid out an agenda that has been obstructed by the Republicans at every turn, so... [applause] ...So, what we need to be doing is not only reforming criminal justice — I have talked about that at some length, including things like body cameras, but we also need to be following the recommendations of the commissioner that President Obama empanelled on policing. There is an agenda there that we need to be following up on. 
Similarly, we need to tackle mass incarceration, and this may be the only bi-partisan issue in the congress this year. We actually have people on both sides of the aisle who have reached the same conclusion, that we can not keep imprisoning more people than anybody else in the world. 
But, I believe that the debate, and the discussion has to go further, Anderson, because we've got to do more about the lives of these children. That's why I started off by saying we need to be committed to making it possible for every child to live up to his or her god given potential. That is... 
COOPER: ...Thank you, Senator... 
CLINTON: ...really hard to do if you don't have early childhood education... 
COOPER: Senator... 
CLINTON: ...if you don't have schools that are able to meet the needs of the people, or good housing, there's a long list... [applause] ...We need a new New Deal for communities of color... 
COOPER: Senator Webb? 
WEBB: I hope I can get that kind of time here. As a President of the United States, every life in this country matters. At the same time, I believe I can say to you, I have had a long history of working with the situation of African Americans. 
We're talking about criminal justice reform, I risked my political life raising the issue of criminal justice reform when I ran for the Senate in Virginia in 2006. I had democratic party political consultants telling me I was committing political suicide. 
We led that issue in the congress. We started a national debate on it. And it wasn't until then that the Republican Party started joining in. 
I also represented a so-called war criminal, an African American Marine who was wounded — who was convicted of murder in Vietnam, for six years. He took his life three years into this. I cleared his name after — after three years. 
COOPER : Thanks , sir . WEBB : And I put the African American soldier on the Mall . I made that recommendation and fought for it . So , if you want someone who is — can stand up in front of you right now and say I have done the hard job , I have taken the risks , I am your person . COOPER : Senator Sanders , let 's talk about income inequality . Wages and incomes are flat . You 've argued that the gap between rich and poor is wider than at any time since the 1920s . We 've had a Democratic president for seven years . What are you going to be able to do that President Obama did n't ? 
SANDERS : Well , first of all , let 's remember where we were when Bush left office . We were losing 800,000 jobs a month . And I know my Republican friends seem to have some amnesia on this issue , but the world 's financial crisis was on — the world 's financial markets system was on the verge of collapse . That 's where we were . Are we better off today than we were then ? Absolutely . But the truth is that for the 40 years , the great middle class of this country has been disappearing . And in my view what we need to do is create millions of jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure ; raise the minimum wage to $ 15 an hour ; pay equity for women workers ; and our disastrous trade policies , which have cost us millions of jobs ; and make every public college and university in this country tuition free . [ applause ] 
COOPER : Secretary Clinton ... [ crosstalk ] COOPER : I 'll let you jump in a moment . Everybody will get in on this in a moment . Secretary Clinton , how would you address this issue ? In all candor , you and your husband are part of the one percent . How can you credibly represent the views of the middle class ? 
CLINTON : Well , you know , both Bill and I have been very blessed . Neither of us came from wealthy families and we 've worked really hard our entire lives . And I want to make sure every single person in this country has the same opportunities that he and I have had , to make the most of their God-given potential and to have the chances that they should have in America for a good education , good job training , and then good jobs . I have a five point economic plan , because this inequality challenge we face , we have faced it at other points . It 's absolutely right . It has n't been this bad since the 1920s . But if you look at the Republicans versus the Democrats when it comes to economic policy , there is no comparison . The economy does better when you have a Democrat in the White House and that 's why we need to have a Democrat in the White House in January 2017. 
COOPER : Governor O'Malley , ( inaudible ) . 
O'MALLEY : Yes . Anderson , I want to associate myself with many of the items that the senator from Vermont mentioned , and I actually did them in our state . We raised the minimum wage , passed the living wage , invested more in infrastructure , went four years in a row without a penny 's increase in college tuition . But there 's another piece that Senator Sanders left out tonight , but he 's been excellent about underscoring that . And that is that we need to separate the casino , speculative , mega-bank gambling that we have to insure with our money , from the commercial banking — namely , reinstating Glass-Steagall . Secretary Clinton mentioned my support eight years ago . And Secretary , I was proud to support you eight years ago , but something happened in between , and that is , Anderson , a Wall Street crash that wiped out millions of jobs and millions of savings for families . And we are still just as vulnerable Paul Volcker says today . We need to reinstate Glass-Steagall and that 's a huge difference on this stage among us as candidates . 
COOPER : Just for viewers at home who may not be reading up on this , Glass-Steagall is the Depression-era banking law repealed in 1999 that prevented commercial banks from engaging in investment banking and insurance activities . Secretary Clinton , he raises a fundamental difference on this stage . Senator Sanders wants to break up the big Wall Street banks . You don't . You say charge the banks more , continue to monitor them . Why is your plan better ? 
CLINTON : Well , my plan is more comprehensive . And frankly , it 's tougher because of course we have to deal with the problem that the banks are still too big to fail . We can never let the American taxpayer and middle class families ever have to bail out the kind of speculative behavior that we saw . But we also have to worry about some of the other players — AIG , a big insurance company ; Lehman Brothers , an investment bank . There's this whole area called ``shadow banking . '' That 's where the experts tell me the next potential problem could come from. CLINTON : So I 'm with both Senator Sanders and Governor O'Malley in putting a lot of attention onto the banks . And the plan that I have put forward would actually empower regulators to break up big banks if we thought they posed a risk . But I want to make sure we 're going to cover everybody , not what caused the problem last time , but what could cause it next time . [ crosstalk ] 
COOPER : Senator Sanders , Secretary Clinton just said that her policy is tougher than yours . 
SANDERS : Well , that 's not true . [ laughter ] 
COOPER : Why ? 
SANDERS : Let us be clear that the greed and recklessness and illegal behavior of Wall Street, where fraud is a business model, helped to destroy this economy and the lives of millions of people . [ applause ] Check the record . In the 1990s — and all due respect — in the 1990s , when I had the Republican leadership and Wall Street spending billions of dollars in lobbying , when the Clinton administration , when Alan Greenspan said , `` what a great idea it would be to allow these huge banks to merge , '' Bernie Sanders fought them , and helped lead the opposition to deregulation . [ applause ] Today , it is my view that when you have the three ... 
COOPER: Senator... 
SANDERS: ...largest banks in America — are much bigger than they were when we bailed them out for being too big to fail, we have got to break them up. [applause] 
COOPER : Secretary Clinton , you have to be able to respond . He brought you up . 
CLINTON : Yeah . You know , I — I respect the passion an intensity . I represented Wall Street , as a senator from New York , and I went to Wall Street in December of 2007 — before the big crash that we had — and I basically said , `` cut it out ! Quit foreclosing on homes ! Quit engaging in these kinds of speculative behaviors . '' I took on the Bush administration for the same thing . So I have thought deeply and long about what we 're gonna do to do exactly what I think both the senator and the governor want , which is to rein in and stop this risk . And my plan would have the potential of actually sending the executives to jail . Nobody went to jail after $ 100 billion in fines were paid and would give regulators the authority to go after the big banks . 
COOPER : Thank you . Thank you . Senator Sanders ... 
CLINTON : But I 'm telling you — I will say it tonight . If only you look at the big banks , you may be missing the forest for the trees . [ crosstalk ]
WEBB : Bernie , say my name so I can get into this . 
SANDERS : I will , just a second . 
WEBB : OK . Thank you . [ laughter ] 
SANDERS : I 'll tell him . In my view , Secretary Clinton , you do not — Congress does not regulate Wall Street . Wall Street regulates Congress . [ applause ] And we have got ta break off these banks . Going to them and saying , `` please , do the right thing '' is kind of naive. 
WEBB : Anderson , I need to jump in ( inaudible ) . 
CLINTON : So no , that 's not what that — I think Dodd-Frank was a very good start , and I think that we have to implement it . We have to prevent the Republicans from ripping it apart . We have to save the Consumer Financial Protection board , which is finally beginning to act to protect consumers . [ applause ] We have work to do . You 've got no argument from me . But I know , if we do n't come in with a very tough and comprehensive approach , like the plan I 'm recommending , we 're gon na be behind instead of ahead on what the next crisis could be . 
COOPER : Governor O'Malley ? Where do you stand ? 

O'MALLEY : Anderson , look , this is — the big banks — I mean , once we repealed Glass-Steagall back in the late 1999s ( ph ) , the big banks , the six of them , went from controlling , what , the equivalent of 15 percent of our GDP to now 65 percent of our GDP . And — ( inaudible ) right before this debate , Secretary Clinton 's campaign put out a lot of reversals on positions on Keystone and many other things . But one of them that we still have a great difference on , Madam Secretary , is that you are not for Glass-Steagall . You are not for putting a firewall between this speculative , risky shadow banking behavior . I am , and the people of our country need a president who 's on their side , willing to protect the Main Street economy from recklessness on Wall Street . We have to fulfill our promise
COOPER : Secretary Clinton I have to let you respond . [ applause ] 
CLINTON : Well , you know , everybody on this stage has changed a position or two . We 've been around a cumulative quite some period of time . [ laughter ] You know , we know that if you are learning , you 're gon na change your position . I never took a position on Keystone until I took a position on Keystone . But I have been on the forefront of dealing with climate change , starting in 2009 , when President Obama and I crashed ( ph ) a meeting with the Chinese and got them to sign up to the first international agreement to combat climate change that they 'd ever joined . So I 'm ... 
COOPER: Thank you. 
CLINTON: ...not taking a back seat to anybody on my values... 
COOPER: Thank... 
CLINTON: ...my principles and the results that I get. 
COOPER: Senator Sanders... [applause] 
Senator Sanders, in 2008, congressional leaders were told, without the 2008 bailout, the U.S. was possibly days away from a complete meltdown. Despite that, you still voted against it. 
As president, would you stand by your principles if it risked the country's financial stability? 
SANDERS: Well, I remember that meeting very well. I remember it like it was yesterday. Hank Paulson, Bernanke came in, and they say, "guys, the economy is going to collapse because Wall Street is going under. It's gonna take the economy with them." 
And you know what I said to Hank Paulson? I said, "Hank, your guys — you come from Goldman Sachs. Your millionaire and billionaire friends caused this problem. How about your millionaire and billionaire friends paying for the bailout, not working families in this country?" 
So to answer your question, no, I would not have let the economy collapse. But it was wrong to ask the middle class to bail out Wall Street. And by the way, I want Wall Street now to help kids in this country go to college, public colleges and universities, free with a Wall Street speculation tax. [applause] 
COOPER: We're going to talk about that in a minute. 
But, Senator Webb, I want to get you in. You have said neither party has the guts to take on Wall Street. Is the system rigged? 
WEBB: There is a reality that I think we all need to recognize with respect to the power of the financial sector. 
And let me just go back a minute and say that on this TARP program, I introduced a piece of legislation calling for a windfall profits tax on the executives of any of these companies that got more than $5 billion, that it was time for them, once they got their compensation and their bonus, to split the rest of the money they made with the nurses and the truck drivers and the soldiers who bailed them out. With respect to the financial sector, I mean, I know that my time has run out but in speaking of changing positions and the position on how this debate has occurred is kind of frustrating because unless somebody mentions my name I can't get into the discussion. 
COOPER: You agreed to these rules and you're wasting time. So if you would finish your answer, we'll move on. 
WEBB: All right. Well, I'm trying to set a mark here so maybe we can get into a little more later on. This hasn't been equal time. 
But if you want to look at what has happened, if we look at the facts in terms of how we're going to deal with this, since that crash, in the last 10 years, the amount of the world's capital economy that Wall Street manages has gone from 44 percent to 55 percent. 
That means the Wall Street money managers are not risking themselves as the same way the American people are when they're going to get their compensation. They're managing money from all over the world. 
We have to take that into consideration when we're looking at ways to regulate it. 
COOPER: Governor Chafee, you have attacked Secretary Clinton for being too close to Wall Street banks. In 1999 you voted for the very bill that made banks bigger. 
CHAFEE: The Glass-Steagall was my very first vote, I'd just arrived, my dad had died in office, I was appointed to the office, it was my very first vote. 
COOPER: Are you saying you didn't know what you were voting for? 
CHAFEE: I'd just arrived at the Senate. I think we'd get some takeovers, and that was one. It was my very first vote, and it was 92-5. It was the... 
COOPER: Well, with all due respect, Governor... CHAFEE: But let me just say... COOPER: ... what does that say about you that you're casting a vote for something you weren't really sure about? 
CHAFEE: I think you're being a little rough. I'd just arrived at the United States Senate. I'd been mayor of my city. My dad had died. I'd been appointed by the governor. It was the first vote and it was 90-5, because it was a conference report. 
But let me just say about income inequality. We've had a lot of talk over the last few minutes, hours, or tens of minutes, but no one is saying how we're going to fix it. And it all started with the Bush tax cuts that favored the wealthy. 
So let's go back to the tax code. And 0.6 percent of Americans are at the top echelon, over 464,000, 0.6 Americans. That's less than 1 percent. But they generate 30 percent of the revenue. And they're doing fine. 
COOPER: Thank you, Governor. 
CHAFEE: So there's still a lot more money to be had from this top echelon. I'm saying let's have another tier and put that back into the tax bracket. And that will generate $42 billion. 
COOPER: I want to bring in Dana Bash. 
CHAFEE: And then we can help the middle class and hard-earning Americans — hard-working Americans. 

COOPER: Dana? 
BASH: Thank you. 
CNN visited college campuses, along with Facebook. And not surprisingly college affordability was among the most pressing issue. 
Senator Sanders, you've mentioned a couple of times you do have a plan to make public colleges free for everyone. Secretary Clinton has criticized that in saying she's not in favor of making a college free for Donald Trump's kids. 
Do you think taxpayers should pick up the tab for wealthy children? 

SANDERS: Well, let me tell you, Donald Trump and his billionaire friends under my policies are going to pay a hell of a lot more in taxes today — taxes in the future than they're paying today. [applause] 
But in terms of education, this is what I think. This is the year 2015. A college degree today, Dana, is the equivalent of what a high school degree was 50 years ago. 
And what we said 50 years ago and a hundred years ago is that every kid in this country should be able to get a high school education regardless of the income of their family. I think we have to say that is true for everybody going to college. 
I think we don't need a complicated system, which the secretary is talking about, the income goes down, the income goes down, if you're poor you have to work, and so forth and so on. 
I pay for my program, by the way, through a tax on Wall Street speculation, which will not only make public colleges and universities tuition-free, it will substantially lower interest rates on college debt, a major crisis in this country. [applause] 

BASH: And, Secretary Clinton, it's not just college tuition that Senator Sanders is talking about, expanding Social Security and giving all Americans Medicare. What's wrong with that? 
CLINTON: Well, let me address college affordability, because I have a plan that I think will really zero in on what the problems are. First, all the 40 million Americans who currently have student debt will be able to refinance their debt to a low interest rate. That will save thousands of dollars for people who are now struggling under this cumbersome, burdensome college debt. 
As a young student in Nevada said to me, the hardest thing about going to college should not be paying for it. So then we have to make it more affordable. How do we make it more affordable? My plan would enable anyone to go to a public college or university tuition free. You would not have to borrow money for tuition. 
But I do believe — and maybe it's because I worked when I went through college; I worked when I went through law school — I think it's important for everybody to have some part of getting this accomplished. That's why I call it a compact. 
BASH: Secretary Clinton... 
CLINTON: But, yes, I would like students to work 10 hours a week... 
BASH : Can you answer the ... 

SANDERS : ... in order to make it possible for them to afford their education . And I want colleges to get their costs down . They are outrageously high in what they 're charging . 

BASH : Secretary Clinton , the question was not just about tuition , though . It was about Senator Sanders ' plan to expand Social Security , to make Medicare available to all Americans . Is that something that you would support ? And if not , why not ? 

CLINTON : Well , I fully support Social Security . And the most important fight we 're going to have is defending it against continuing Republican efforts to privatize it . 

BASH : Do you want to expand it ? 

CLINTON : I want to enhance the benefits for the poorest recipients of Social Security . We have a lot of women on Social Security , particularly widowed and single women who didn't make a lot of money during their careers , and they are impoverished , and they need more help from the Social Security system . And I will focus — I will focus on helping those people who need it the most . And of course I 'm going to defend Social Security . I 'm going to look for ways to try to make sure it 's solvent into the future . And we also need to talk about health care at some time , because we agree on the goals , we just disagree on the means . 

SANDERS : When the Republicans — when the Republicans in the Congress and some Democrats were talking about cutting Social Security and benefits for disabled veterans , for the so-called chained CPI , I founded a caucus called the Defending Social Security Caucus . My view is that when you have millions of seniors in this country trying to get by — and I do n't know how they do on $ 11,000 , $ 12,000 , $ 13,000 a year — you do n't cut Social Security , you expand it . And the way you expand it is by lifting the cap on taxable incomes so that you do away with the absurdity of a millionaire paying the same amount into the system as somebody making $ 118,000 . You do that , Social Security is solvent until 2061 and you can expand benefits . [ crosstalk ] 

COOPER : Senator Sanders , I want to bring it over to Juan Carlos Lopez from CNN en Espanol . We 're obviously in Nevada . It 's had the highest percentage of undocumented immigrants of any state in the country as of last year . Juan Carlos ? 

LOPEZ : Gracias , Anderson . Senator Sanders , in 2013 , you voted for immigration reform . But in 2007 , when Democrats controlled Congress and the Bush White House was onboard , you voted against it . Why should Latino voters trust you now when you left them at the altar at the moment when reform was very close ? 

SANDERS : I didn't leave anybody at the altar . I voted against that piece of legislation because it had guest-worker provisions in it which the Southern Poverty Law Center talked about being semi-slavery . Guest workers are coming in , they 're working under terrible conditions , but if they stand up for their rights , they 're thrown out of the country . I was not the only progressive to vote against that legislation for that reason . Tom Harkin , a very good friend of Hillary Clinton 's and mine , one of the leading labor advocates , also voted against that . 

LOPEZ : Tom Harkin isn't running for president . You are . 

SANDERS : I know that . But point being is that progressives did vote against that for that reason . My view right now — and always has been — is that when you have 11 million undocumented people in this country , we need comprehensive immigration reform , we need a path toward citizenship , we need to take people out of the shadows . 

O'MALLEY : And Juan Carlos — Juan Carlos ... 

LOPEZ : Secretary Clinton — Secretary Clinton , Governor O'Malley wants to open up Obamacare to millions of undocumented immigrants and their children , including almost 90,000 people right here in Nevada . Do you ? 

CLINTON : Well , first of all , I want to make sure every child gets health care . That 's why I helped to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program , and I want to support states that are expanding health care and including undocumented children and others . I want to open up the opportunity for immigrants to be able to buy in to the exchanges under the Affordable Care Act . I think to go beyond that , as I understand what Governor O'Malley has recommended , so that they would get the same subsidies . I think that is — it raises so many issues . It would be very difficult to administer , it needs to be part of a comprehensive immigration reform , when we finally do get to it .

LOPEZ : Governor O'Malley ? 

O'MALLEY : Juan Carlos , I think what you 've heard up here is some of the old thinking on immigration reform , and that 's why it 's gridlocked . We need to understand that our country is stronger in every generation by the arrival of new American immigrants . That is why I have put out a policy for comprehensive immigration reform , that is why I would go further than President Obama has on DACA , and DAPA . I mean , we are a nation of immigrants , we are made stronger by immigrants . Do you think for a second that simply because somebody 's standing in a broken que on naturalization they 're not going to go to the hospital , and that care is n't going to fall on to our insurance rates ? I am for a generous , compassionate America that says we 're all in this together . We need comprehensive 
COOPER: Senator Webb... 
O'MALLEY: ...immigration reform. It'll make wages go up in America $250 for every year... 
LOPEZ: Senator Webb, do you support the undocumented immigrants getting Obamacare? 
WEBB: I wouldn't have a problem with that. Let me start by saying my wife is an immigrant. She was a refugee, her family escaped from Vietnam on a boat-- her entire extended family, after the communists took over, when hundreds of thousands of people were out there and thousands of them were dying. Went to two refugee camps, she never spoke English in her home, and she ended, as I said, graduating from Cornell Law School. That's not only American dream, that's a value that we have with a good immigration system in place. No country has — is a country without defining its borders. We need to resolve this issue. I actually introduced an amendment in the 2007 immigration bill... 
LOPEZ : ... Thank you , Senator .
WEBB : ... Giving a pathway to citizenship to those people who had come here , and put down their roots , and met as a series of standards ...
COOPER : ... Thank you , Senator .
WEBB : ... lost ( ph ) — I introduced that in 2007 — We need a comprehensive reform , and we need to be able to define our borders .
COOPER : Secretary Clinton ?
CLINTON : I want to follow up because I think underneath Juan Carlos ' important questions , there is such a difference between everything you 're hearing here on this stage , and what we hear from the Republicans . [ applause ]
O'MALLEY : Here . Here . ( CHEERING ) ( APPLAUSE ) CLINTON : Demonize hard-working immigrants who have insulted them . You know , I came to Las Vegas in , I think , May . Early may . Met with a group of DREAMers , I wish everybody in America could meet with this young people , to hear their stories , to know their incredible talent , their determination , and that 's why I would go further than even the executive orders that President Obama has signed when I 'm president . ( CROSS TALK )
COOPER : Secretary Clinton , let me ask you . Two of your rivals from your left , Governor O'Malley , and Senator Sanders , want to provide instate college tuition to undocumented immigrants . Where do you stand on that ?
CLINTON : My plan would support any state that takes that position , and would work with those states and encourage more states to do the same thing .
COOPER : So , on the record , you believe that undocumented immigrants should get instate college tuition .
CLINTON : If their states agree , then we want more states to do the same thing .
COOPER : Governor O'Malley ?
O'MALLEY : Anderson , we actually did this in my state of Maryland . We passed ... [ applause ]
O'MALLEY : We passed a state version of the DREAM Act ... ( CHEERING )
O'MALLEY : ... And a lot of the xenophobes , the immigrant haters like some that we 've heard like , Donald Trump , that carnival barker in the Republican party, tried to mischaracterize it as free tuition for illegal immigrants . But , we took our case to the people when it was petitioned to referendum , and we won with 58 percent of the vote . The more our children learn , the more they will earn , and that 's true of children who have yet to be naturalized but will become American citizens ...
COOPER : Senator Sanders , you talked about your record on the Veteran affairs committee . You served on that committee for the last eight years , including two years as its chairman while veterans died waiting for health care . You and Senator McCain ultimately addressed the issue with bi-partisan legislation . Why did it take 18 Inspector General reports , and a CNN investigation , and others , before you and your colleagues took action ?
SANDERS : Well , I was chairman for two years , and when I was chairman we did take action . What we did is pass a $ 15 billion dollar piece of legislation which brought in many , many new doctors , and nurses into the V.A . so that veterans in this country could get the health care when they needed it , and not be on long waiting lines . And , the other part of that legislation said that if a veteran is living more than 40 miles away from a V.A . facility , that veteran could get health care from the community health center , or the private sector . As a result of that legislation , we went further in than any time in recent history in improving health care for the men and women of this country who put their lives on the line to defend them . 
COOPER: Governor Chafee, you and Hillary Clinton both voted for the Patriot Act which created the NSA surveillance program. You've emphasized civil liberties, privacy during your campaign. Aren't these two things in conflict? 

CHAFEE: No, that was another 99 to one vote for the Patriot Act, and it was seen as at the time modernizing our ability to do what we've always done to tap phones which always required a warrant. And I voted for that. 

COOPER: Do you regret that vote? 

CHAFEE: No, no. As long as you're getting a warrant, I believe that under the Fourth Amendment, you should be able to do surveillance, but you need a warrant. That's what the Fourth Amendment says. And in the Patriot Act, section 215 started to get broadened too far. So I would be in favor of addressing and reforming section 215 of the Patriot Act. 

COOPER: Secretary Clinton, do you regret your vote on the Patriot Act? 

CLINTON: No, I don't. I think that it was necessary to make sure that we were able after 9/11 to put in place the security that we needed. And it is true that it did require that there be a process. What happened, however, is that the Bush administration began to chip away at that process. And I began to speak out about their use of warrantless surveillance and the other behavior that they engaged in. 
We always have to keep the balance of civil liberties, privacy and security. It's not easy in a democracy, but we have to keep it in mind. 

COOPER: Senator — Senator Sanders, you're the only one on this stage who voted against the Patriot Act in 2001... [applause] 
SANDERS: It was 99 to one and I was maybe the one. I don't know. 
COOPER : ... and the reauthorization votes . Let me ask you , if elected , would you shut down the NSA surveillance program ? SANDERS : I 'm sorry ? COOPER : Would you shut down the NSA surveillance program ? SANDERS : Absolutely . Of course . COOPER : You would , point blank . SANDERS : Well , I would shut down — make — I 'd shut down what exists right now is that virtually every telephone call in this country ends up in a file at the NSA . That is unacceptable to me . But it 's not just government surveillance . I think the government is involved in our e-mails ; is involved in our websites . Corporate America is doing it as well . If we are a free country , we have the right to be free . Yes , we have to defend ourselves against terrorism , but there are ways to do that without impinging on our constitutional rights and our privacy rights . O'MALLEY ( ? ) : Anderson , the NSA ... COOPER : Governor Chafee , Edward Snowden , is he a traitor or a hero ? CHAFEE : No , I would bring him home . The courts have ruled that what he did — what he did was say the American ... [ crosstalk ] COOPER : Bring him home , no jail time ? CHAFEE : ... the American government was acting illegally . That 's what the federal courts have said ; what Snowden did showed that the American government was acting illegally for the Fourth Amendment . So I would bring him home . COOPER : Secretary Clinton , hero or traitor ? CLINTON : He broke the laws of the United States . He could have been a whistleblower . He could have gotten all of the protections of being a whistleblower . He could have raised all the issues that he has raised . And I think there would have been a positive response to that . 
COOPER: Should he do jail time? 
ClINTON: In addition — in addition, he stole very important information that has unfortunately fallen into a lot of the wrong hands. So I don't think he should be brought home without facing the music. 
COOPER: Governor O'Malley, Snowden? [applause] 
O'MALLEY: Anderson, Snowden put a lot of Americans' lives at risk. Snowden broke the law. Whistleblowers do not run to Russia and try to get protection from Putin. If he really believes that, he should be back here. 
COOPER: Senator Sanders, Edward Snowden? 
SANDERS: I think Snowden played a very important role in educating the American people to the degree in which our civil liberties and our constitutional rights are being undermined. 

COOPER : Is he a hero ? 
SANDERS : He did — he did break the law , and I think there should be a penalty to that . But I think what he did in educating us should be taken into consideration before he is ( inaudible ) .
 COOPER : Senator Webb , Edward Snowden ? 
WEBB : I — well , I — I would leave his ultimate judgment to the legal system . Here 's what I do believe . We have a serious problem in terms of the collection of personal information in this country . And one of the things that I did during the FISA bill in 2007 , the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act , was introduce with Russ Feingold two amendments basically saying , `` We understand the realities of how you have to collect this broad information in the Internet age , but after a certain period of time , you need to destroy the personal information that you have if people have not been brought — if criminal justice proceedings have not been brought against them . '' We 've got a vast data bank of information that is ripe for people with bad intentions to be able to use . And they need to be destroyed . 
COOPER : Another — another question for each of you , starting with Governor Chafee . Name the one thing — the one way that your administration would not be a third term of President Obama .
CHAFEE : Certainly , ending the wars . We 've got to stop these wars . You have to have a new dynamic , a new paradigm . We just spent a half-billion dollars arming and training soldiers , the rebel soldiers in Syria . They quickly join the other side . We bombed the ... [ crosstalk ] 
COOPER : President Obama 's generals right now are suggesting keeping troops in Afghanistan after the time he wanted them pulled out . Would you keep them there ? 
CHAFEE : I 'd like to finish my question — my answer . And also we just bombed a hospital . We 've had drone strikes that hit civilian weddings . So I would change how we — our approach to the Middle East . We need a new paradigm in the Middle East . 
COOPER : Governor O'Malley , how would you be different than President Obama 's administration ? O'MALLEY : I would follow through on the promise that the American people thought we made as Democratic Party , to protect the Main Street economy from recklessness on Wall Street . I would push to separate out these too-big-to-jail , too-big-to-fail banks , and put in place Glass-Steagall , a modern Glass-Steagall that creates a firewall so that this wreckage of our economy can never happen again . 
COOPER : Secretary Clinton , how would you not be a third term of President Obama ? CLINTON : Well , I think that 's pretty obvious . I think being the first woman president would be quite a change from the presidents we 've had up until this point , including President Obama . COOPER : Is there a policy difference ? CLINTON : Well , there 's a lot that I would like to do to build on the successes of President Obama , but also , as I 'm laying out , to go beyond . And that 's in my economic plans , how I would deal with the prescription drug companies , how I would deal with college , how I would deal with a full range of issues that I 've been talking about throughout this campaign to go further . COOPER : Senator Sanders ? SANDERS : I have a lot of respect for president Obama . I have worked with him time and time again on many , many issues . But here 's where I do disagree . I believe that the power of corporate America, the power of Wall Street, the power of the drug companies, the power of the corporate media is so great that the only way we really transform America and do the things that the middle class and working class desperately need is through a political revolution when millions of people begin to come together and stand up and say: Our government is going to work for all of us, not just a handful of billionaires . [ applause ] COOPER : Senator Webb , how would you not be a third term for Obama ? WEBB : I got a great deal of admiration and affection for Senator Sanders , but I — Bernie , I do n't think the revolution 's going to come . And I do n't think the Congress is going to pay for a lot of this stuff . And if there would be a major difference between my administration and the Obama administration , it would be in the use of executive authority . I came up as a committee counsel in the Congress , used to put dozens of bills through the House floor every year as a committee counsel on the Veterans Committee . I have a very strong feeling about how our federal system works and how we need to lead and energize the congressional process instead of allowing these divisions to continue to paralyze what we 're doing . So I would lead — working with both parties in the Congress and working through them in the traditional way that our Constitution sets ( ph ) . COOPER : Senator Sanders , he cited you . You do n't hear a lot of Democratic presidential candidates talking about revolution . What do you mean ? SANDERS : What I mean is that we need to have one of the larger voter turnouts in the world , not one of the lowest . We need to raise public consciousness . We need the American people to know what 's going on in Washington in a way that today they do not know . [ applause ] And when people come together in a way that does not exist now and are prepared to take on the big money interest , then we could bring the kind of change we need . O'MALLEY : Anderson , I actually have talked about a revolution . What we need is a green energy revolution . We need to move America to a 100 percent clean electric grid by 2050 and create 5 million jobs along the way .
COOPER : And we want to — and we 're going to talk more about climate change and environmental issues coming up . Some of the candidates have tried marijuana , as have pretty much — probably everybody in this room . ( LAUGHTER ) Others have not . Does that influence — does it influence their views on legalization ? Find out that and others ahead . ( COMMERCIAL BREAK ) COOPER : And welcome back to this CNN Democratic presidential debate . It has been quite a night so far . We are in the final block of this debate . All the candidates are back , which I 'm very happy to see . ( LAUGHTER ) COOPER : It 's a long story . Let 's continue , shall we ? Secretary Clinton , welcome back . CLINTON : Well , thank you . ( LAUGHTER ) CLINTON : You know , it does take me a little longer . That 's all I can say . COOPER : That 's right . Secretary Clinton , Governor O'Malley says the presidency is not a crown to be passed back and forth between two royal families . This year has been the year of the outsider in politics , just ask Bernie Sanders . Why should Democrats embrace an insider like yourself ? CLINTON : Well , I ca n't think of anything more of an outsider than electing the first woman president , but I 'm not just running because I would be the first woman president . [ applause ] CLINTON : I 'm running because I have a lifetime of experience in getting results and fighting for people , fighting for kids , for women , for families , fighting to even the odds . And I know what it takes to get things done . I know how to find common ground and I know how to stand my ground . And I think we 're going to need both of those in Washington to get anything that we 're talking about up here accomplished . So I 'm very happy that I have both the commitment of a lifetime and the experience of a lifetime to bring together to offer the American people . COOPER : Governor O'Malley , do you want to tell Secretary Clinton why she should n't get the crown ? O'MALLEY : Well , actually , you know , we had this conversation . And I will share with you that I 've traveled all around the country , Anderson , and there 's two phrases I keep hearing again and again and again . And they 're the phrases `` new leadership '' and `` getting things done . '' We can not be this dissatisfied with our gridlocked national politics and an economy where 70 percent of us are earning the same or less than we were 12 years ago , and think that a resort to old names is going to move us forward . I respect what Secretary Clinton and her husband have done for our country . But our country needs new leadership to move forward . COOPER : Secretary Clinton , you have to be able to respond , if you want . CLINTON : Well , I would not ask anyone to vote for me based on my last name . I would ask them to listen to what I 'm proposing , look at what I 've accomplished in the Senate , as secretary of of state , and then draw your own conclusion . I certainly am not campaigning to become president because my last name is Clinton . I 'm campaigning because I think I have the right combination of what the country needs , at this point , and I think I can take the fight to the Republicans , because we can not afford a Republican to succeed Barack Obama as president of the United States . 
COOPER: (inaudible). [applause] 
Senator Sanders, does she have the right stuff? 
SANDERS: I think — I think that there is profound frustration all over this country with establishment politics. I am the only candidate running for president who is not a billionaire, who has raised substantial sums of money, and I do not have a super PAC. [applause] 
I am not raising money from millionaires and billionaires, and in fact, tonight, in terms of what a political revolution is about, there are 4,000 house parties — 100,000 people in this country — watching this debate tonight who want real change in this country. 
COOPER: we've got — we — a lot of questions we've got about climate change, and we're gonna go to Don Lemon. Don? 
LEMON: All right. This one is for Martin O'Malley. Anderson, Governor O'Malley, this is from Anna Bettis from Tempe, Arizona. Here it is. 
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) 
QUESTION: As a young person, I'm very concerned about climate change and how it will affect my future. As a presidential candidate, what will you do to address climate change? 
(END VIDEO CLIP) 
LEMON: So, Governor O'Malley, please tell Anna how you would protect the environment better than all the other candidates up on that stage. 
O'MALLEY: Yeah. 
Anna, I have put forward a plan — and I'm the only candidate, I believe, in either party to do this — to move America forward to a 100 percent clean electric grid by 2050. 
We did not land a man on the moon with an all-of-the-above strategy. It was an intentional engineering challenge, and we solved it as a nation. And our nation must solve this one. 
So I put forward the plan that would extend the investor tax credits for solar and for wind. If you go across Iowa, you see that 30 percent of their energy now comes from wind. We're here in Las Vegas, one of the most sustainable cities in America, doing important things in terms of green building, architecture and design. 
We can get there as a nation, but it's going to require presidential leadership. And as president, I intend to sign as my very first order in office the — an order that moves us as a nation and dedicates our resources to solving this problem and moving us to a 100 percent clean electric grid by 2050. 
COOPER: Governor... 
O'MALLEY: We can do it. 
COOPER: ...Governor O'Malley, thank you very much. [applause] 
Senator Webb, you have a very different view than just about anybody else on this stage, and unlike a lot of Democrats. You're pro-coal, you're pro-offshore drilling, you're pro-Keystone pipeline. Are — again, are you — the question is, are you out of step with the Democratic party? 
WEBB: Well, the — the question really is how are we going to solve energy problems here and in the global environment if you really want to address climate change? 
And when I was in the Senate, I was an all-of-the-above energy voter. We introduced legislation to bring in alternate energy as well as nuclear power. I'm a strong proponent of nuclear power. It is safe, it is clean. And really, we are not going to solve climate change simply with the laws here. 
We've done a good job in this country since 1970. If you look at China and India, they're the greatest polluters in the world. Fifteen out of the 20 most polluted cities in the world are in one of those two countries. We need to solve this in a global way. It's a global problem and I have been very strong on — on doing that. The — the agreements — the so-called agreements that we have had with China are illusory in terms of the immediate requirements of the — of the Chinese government itself. 
So let's solve this problem in an international way, and then we really will have a — a way to address climate change. 

COOPER : Senator Sanders , are you tougher on — on climate change than Secretary Clinton ? 

SANDERS
 : Well , I will tell you this . I believe — and Pope Francis made this 
point . This is a moral issue . The scientists are telling us that we 
need to move extremely boldly . I am proud that , along with Senator 
Barbara Boxer , a few years ago , we introduced the first piece of 
climate change legislation which called for a tax on carbon . And let me
 also tell you that nothing is gonna happen unless we are prepared to 
deal with campaign finance reform , because the fossil fuel industry is 
funding the Republican Party , which denies the reality of climate 
change ... [ applause ] ... and certainly is not prepared to go forward 
aggressively . This is a moral issue . We have got to be extremely 
aggressive in working with China , India , Russia . 

COOPER : Senator — thank you , Senator . 

SANDERS : The planet — the future of the planet is at stake . 

COOPER : Secretary Clinton , I want you to be able to respond , then I 'm gonna go to ( ph ) ( inaudible ) . 

CLINTON
 : Well , that — that 's exactly what I 've been doing . When we met in 
Copenhagen in 2009 and , literally , President Obama and I were hunting 
for the Chinese , going throughout this huge convention center , because
 we knew we had to get them to agree to something . Because there will 
be no effective efforts against climate change unless China and India 
join with the rest of the world . They told us they 'd left for the 
airport ; we found out they were having a secret meeting . We marched up
 , we broke in , we said , `` We 've been looking all over for you . Let
 's sit down and talk about what we need to do . '' And we did come up 
with the first international agreement that China has signed . Thanks to
 President Obama 's leadership , it 's now gone much further . 

COOPER : Thank you . 

CLINTON
 : And I do think that the bilateral agreement that President Obama made
 with the Chinese was significant . Now , it needs to go further , and 
there will be an international meeting at the end of this year , and we 
must get verifiable commitments to fight climate change from every 
country gathered there . 

COOPER : Dana Bash ? 

BASH: Secretary Clinton, you now support mandated paid family leave. 
CLINTON: Mm-hmm. 
BASH: Carly Fiorina, the first female CEO of a Fortune 50 company, argues, if the government requires paid leave, it will force small businesses to, quote, "hire fewer people and create fewer jobs." What do you say not only to Carly Fiorina, but also a small-business owner out there who says, you know, I like this idea, but I just can't afford it? 
CLINTON: Well, I'm surprised she says that, because California has had a paid leave program for a number of years. And it's... 
BASH: It's on the federal level. 
CLINTON: Well, but all — well, on a state level, a state as big as many countries in the world. And it has not had the ill effects that the Republicans are always saying it will have. And I think this is — this is typical Republican scare tactics. We can design a system and pay for it that does not put the burden on small businesses. 
I remember as a young mother, you know, having a baby wake up who was sick and I'm supposed to be in court, because I was practicing law. I know what it's like. And I think we need to recognize the incredible challenges that so many parents face, particularly working moms. 
I see my good friend, Senator Gillibrand, in the front row. She's been a champion of this. We need to get a consensus through this campaign, which is why I'm talking about it everywhere I go, and we need to join the rest of the advanced world in having it. 
BASH: But Secretary — Secretary Clinton, even many people who agree with you might say, look, this is very hard to do, especially in today's day and age. There are so many people who say, "Really? Another government program? Is that what you're proposing? And at the expense of taxpayer money?" 
CLINTON: Well, look, you know, when people say that — it's always the Republicans or their sympathizers who say, "You can't have paid leave, you can't provide health care." They don't mind having big government to interfere with a woman's right to choose and to try to take down Planned Parenthood. They're fine with big government when it comes to that. I'm sick of it. [applause] 
You know, we can do these things. [applause] 
We should not be paralyzed — we should not be paralyzed by the Republicans and their constant refrain, "big government this, big government that," that except for what they want to impose on the American people. I know we can afford it, because we're going to make the wealthy pay for it. That is the way to get it done. 
COOPER: Thank you. Senator Sanders? 
SANDERS: Yeah, Dana, here's the point: Every other major country on Earth, every one, including some small countries, say that when a mother has a baby, she should stay home with that baby. We are the only major country. That is an international embarrassment that we do not provide family — paid family and medical leave. [applause] 
Second of all, the secretary is right. Republicans tell us we can't do anything except give tax breaks to billionaires and cut Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. That's not what the American people want. 
COOPER: Governor O'Malley? 
O'MALLEY: Anderson, in our state, we actually expanded family leave. And I have to agree with Secretary Clinton and Senator Sanders. Look, the genius of our nation is that we find ways in every generation to include more of our people more fully in the economic life of our country, and we need to do that for our families, and especially so that women aren't penalized in having to drop out of the workforce. My wife, Katie, is here with our four kids. And, man, that was a juggle when we had little kids and — and keeping jobs and moving forwards. We would be a stronger nation economically if we had paid family leave. 
COOPER: Governor, thank you. The issue now, particularly in this state, is recreational marijuana. I want to go to Juan Carlos Lopez. 

LOPEZ: Thank you, Anderson. 
Senator Sanders, right here in Nevada, there will be a measure to legalize recreational marijuana on the 2016 ballot. You've said you smoked marijuana twice; it didn't quite work for you. If you were a Nevada resident, how would you vote? 
SANDERS: I suspect I would vote yes. [applause] 
And I would vote yes because I am seeing in this country too many lives being destroyed for non-violent offenses. We have a criminal justice system that lets CEOs on Wall Street walk away, and yet we are imprisoning or giving jail sentences to young people who are smoking marijuana. I think we have to think through this war on drugs... [applause] ...which has done an enormous amount of damage. We need to rethink our criminal justice system, we we've got a lot of work to do in that area. 
O'MALLEY: Juan Carlos? [applause] 
LOPEZ: Secretary Clinton, you told Christiane Amanpour you didn't smoke pot when you were young, and you're not going to start now. [laughter] 
When asked about legalizing recreational marijuana, you told her let's wait and see how it plays out in Colorado and Washington. It's been more than a year since you've said that. Are you ready to take a position tonight? 
CLINTON: No. I think that we have the opportunity through the states that are pursuing recreational marijuana to find out a lot more than we know today. I do support the use of medical marijuana, and I think even there we need to do a lot more research so that we know exactly how we're going to help people for whom medical marijuana provides relief. 
So, I think we're just at the beginning, but I agree completely with the idea that we have got to stop imprisoning people who use marijuana. Therefore, we need more states, cities, and the federal government to begin to address this so that we don't have this terrible result that Senator Sanders was talking about where we have a huge population in our prisons for nonviolent, low-level offenses that are primarily due to marijuana. 
COOPER: Secretary Clinton, thank you. I want to go to Don Lemon with another Facebook question. 
LEMON: Alright, Anderson. This is for Senator Sanders, OK? This is from Carrie (ph) Kang (ph) from Manassas, Virginia, would like would like to ask the Senator, "President Obama has had a difficult time getting Republicans to compromise on just about every agenda. How will you approach this going forward, and will it be any different?" 
Senator? 
SANDERS: The Republican party, since I've been in the Senate, and since President Obama has been in office, has played a terrible, terrible role of being total obstructionists. Every effort that he has made, that some of us have made, they have said no, no, no. 
Now, in my view, the only way we can take on the right wing republicans who are, by the way, I hope will not continue to control the Senate and the House when one of us elected President... [applause] ...But the only way we can get things done is by having millions of people coming together. If we want free tuition at public colleges and universities, millions of young people are going to have to demand it, and give the Republicans an offer they can't refuse. 
If we want to raise the minimum wage to $15 bucks an hour, workers are going to have to come together and look the Republicans in the eye, and say, "We know what's going on. You vote against us, you are out of your job." [applause] 
COOPER: We're going to hear from all the candidates coming up. We're going to take a short break. More from the candidates in a moment. [applause] 
[commercial break]

COOPER: And welcome back to the final round of the CNN Democratic presidential debate. 
This is a question to each of you. Each of you, by the way, are going to have closing statements to make. Each of you will have 90 seconds. But a final question to each of you. If you can, just try to — 15 seconds if you can. 
Governor Chafee, Franklin Delano Roosevelt once said, "I ask you to judge me by the enemies I have made." You've all made a few people upset over your political careers. Which enemy are you most proud of? [laughter]
CHAFEE: I guess the coal lobby. I've worked hard for climate change and I want to work with the coal lobby. But in my time in the Senate, tried to bring them to the table so that we could address carbon dioxide. I'm proud to be at odds with the coal lobby. 
COOPER: Governor O'Malley? 
O'MALLEY: The National Rifle Association. [applause] 
COOPER: Secretary Clinton? 
CLINTON: Well, in addition to the NRA, the health insurance companies, the drug companies, the Iranians. [laughter]
Probably the Republicans. [laughter and applause] 
COOPER: Senator Sanders? 
SANDERS: As someone who has taken on probably every special interest that there is in Washington, I would lump Wall Street and the pharmaceutical industry at the top of my life of people who do not like me. [applause] 
COOPER: Senator Webb? 
WEBB: I'd have to say the enemy soldier that threw the grenade that wounded me, but he's not around right now to talk to. 

COOPER: All right. Time for closing statements. Each of you will have 90 seconds. 
Governor Chafee, let's begin with you. 
CHAFEE: Thank you, Anderson. Thank you, CNN. And thank you, Facebook, for sponsoring this debate. 
America has many challenges confronting us — ending the perpetual wars, addressing climate change, addressing income inequality, funding education, funding infrastructure, funding healthcare, helping black Americans, helping Native Americans. We have many challenges. Who is best able to confront these challenges? 
I've served in government at many levels. I know what it's like to solve problems at the local level because I did it as mayor. I know how to get legislation passed through Congress because I did it as a senator. I know how to turn around a state because I did as governor of Rhode Island. 
But what I'm most proud of is that in 30 years of public service, I have had no scandals. I have high ethical standards. And what I'm most proud of is my judgment, particularly in the Iraq war vote. There was a lot of pressure — political pressure, public pressure. But I did my homework and I did not believe that the evidence was there that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction. And we live now with the consequences. 
So that kind of judgment is what we want in a president going forward. And I'm running for president to end the wars. I want to be the peacemaker. I am a proven peacemaker. Please go to Chafee 2016 to learn more about me. Thank you. [applause] 

COOPER: Governor Chafee, thank you very much. Senator Webb, your final statement for 90 seconds. 
WEBB: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, it's been a pleasure to be with you tonight. You've heard a lot of promises up here; you've heard a lot of rhetoric. They all seem to happen during campaigns, and then once the election's over, people start from scratch again and try to get things done. 
One of the things I can promise you, if you look at my record, in and out of government, is that I've always been willing to take on a complicated, something unpopular issues, and work them through, the complex issues, and work them through in order to have the solution. 
We did it with criminal justice reform. We've had a lot of discussion here about criminal justice reform. We did it in other ways. We need a national political strategy for our economy, for our social policy, for social justice, and, by the way, for how you run and manage the most complex bureaucracy in the world, which is the federal government. 
I know how to lead. I did it in Vietnam, I did it in the Pentagon, I did it in the Senate, and if you will help me overcome this cavalcade of — of financial irregularities and money that is poisoning our political process, I am ready to do that for you in the White House. 

COOPER: Senator Webb, thank you very much. 
Governor O'Malley, you have 90 seconds. 
O'MALLEY: Anderson, thank you. 
I am very, very grateful to have been able to be on this stage with this distinguished group of candidates tonight. And what you heard tonight, Anderson, was a very, very — and all of you watching at home — was a very, very different debate than from the sort of debate you heard from the two presidential Republican debates. [applause] 
On this stage — on this stage, you didn't hear anyone denigrate women, you didn't hear anyone make racist comments about new American immigrants, you didn't hear anyone speak ill of another American because of their religious belief. 
What you heard instead on this stage tonight was an honest search for the answers that will move our country forward, to move us to a 100 percent clean electric energy grid by 2050, to take the actions that we have always taken as Americans so that we can actually attack injustice in our country, employ more of our people, rebuild our cities and towns, educate our children at higher and better levels, and include more of our people in the economic, social, and political life of our country. 
I truly believe that we are standing on the threshold of a new era of American progress. Unless you've become discouraged about our gridlock in Congress, talk to our young people under 30, because you'll never find among them people that want to bash immigrants or people that want to deny rights to gay couples. [applause] 
That tells me we are moving to a more connected, generous, and compassionate place, and we need to speak to the goodness within our country. [applause] 

COOPER: Governor O'Malley, thank you very much. 
Senator Sanders, final, closing thoughts, 90 seconds. 
SANDERS: This is a great country, but we have many, many serious problems. We should not be the country that has the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country and more wealth and income inequality than any other country. 
We should not be the only major country on Earth that does not guarantee health care to all of our people as a right of citizenship and we should not be the only major country that does not provide medical and — and parental leave — family and parental leave to all of our families. 
Now, at the end of our day, here is the truth that very few candidates will say, is that nobody up here, certainly no Republican, can address the major crises facing our country unless millions of people begin to stand up to the billionaire class that has so much power over our economy and our political life. 
Jim Webb is right: Money is pouring in to this campaign through super PACs. We are doing it the old-fashioned way: 650,000 individual contributions. And if people want to help us out, BernieSanders.com. We are averaging $30 bucks apiece. We would appreciate your help. [applause] 

COOPER: Secretary Clinton? 
CLINTON: Thank you very much, Anderson. And thanks to all the viewers who tuned in tonight. 
I think what you did see is that, in this debate, we tried to deal with some of the very tough issues facing our country. That's in stark contrast to the Republicans who are currently running for president. 
What you have to ask yourself is: Who amongst us has the vision for actually making the changes that are going to improve the lives of the American people? Who has the tenacity and the ability and the proven track record of getting that done? 
Now, I revere my late mother, and she gave me a lot of good advice. But one of the best pieces of advice she gave me was, you know, the issue is not whether or not you get knocked down. It's whether you get back up. 
America's been knocked down. That Great Recession, 9 million people lost their jobs, 5 million lost their homes, $13 trillion in wealth disappeared. And although we've made progress, we're standing but not running the way America needs to. 
My mission as president will be to raise incomes for hard-working middle-class families and to make sure that we get back to the basic bargain I was raised with: If you work hard and you do your part, you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead. 
Please join me in this campaign. Please come and make it clear that America's best days are still ahead. Thank you very much. [applause] 
COOPER: Well, that does it for this Democratic presidential debate. On behalf of everyone at CNN, we want to thank the candidates, our debate partners at Facebook, the Wynn Resort, and the Democratic National Committee. Thanks also to Dana Bash, Juan Carlos Lopez, and Don Lemon. We'll be back in Las Vegas December 15th, when CNN hosts our next Republican presidential debate. That will be moderated by my colleague, Wolf Blitzer.

BAIER: Gentlemen, we know how much you love hand-raising questions. So we promise, this is the only one tonight: the only one. Is there anyone on stage, and can I see hands, who is unwilling tonight to pledge your support to the eventual nominee of the Republican party and pledge to not run an independent campaign against that person. 
Again, we're looking for you to raise your hand now -- raise your hand now if you won't make that pledge tonight. 
Mr. Trump. [booing] Mr. Trump to be clear, you're standing on a Republican primary debate stage. 
TRUMP: I fully understand. 
BAIER: The place where the RNC will give the nominee the nod. 
TRUMP: I fully understand. 
BAIER: And that experts say an independent run would almost certainly hand the race over to Democrats and likely another Clinton. 
You can't say tonight that you can make that pledge? 
TRUMP: I cannot say. I have to respect the person that, if it's not me, the person that wins, if I do win, and I'm leading by quite a bit, that's what I want to do. I can totally make that pledge. If I'm the nominee, I will pledge I will not run as an independent. But -- and I am discussing it with everybody, but I'm, you know, talking about a lot of leverage. We want to win, and we will win. But I want to win as the Republican. I want to run as the Republican nominee. 
BAIER: So tonight, you can't say if another one of these... 
PAUL: This is what's wrong! 
BAIER : OK. 

PAUL : I mean , this is what 's wrong . He buys and sells politicians of all stripes , he 's already ... 

BAIER : Dr. Paul . 

PAUL : Hey , look , look ! He 's already hedging his bet on the Clintons , OK ? So if he doesn't run as a Republican , maybe he supports Clinton , or maybe he runs as an independent ... 

BAIER : OK. 

PAUL : ... but I 'd say that he 's already hedging his bets because he 's used to buying politicians . 

TRUMP : Well , I've given him plenty of money . 

BAIER : Just to be clear , you can't make a -- we 're gonna -- we 're going to move on . You 're not gonna make the pledge tonight ? 

TRUMP : I will not make the pledge at this time . 

BAIER : OK. Alright . [ laughter and boing ] 
KELLY: Gentlemen, our first round of questions is on the subject of electability in the general election, and we start tonight with you, Dr. Carson. 
You are a successful neurosurgeon, but you admit that you have had to study up on foreign policy, saying there's a lot to learn. 
Your critics say that your inexperience shows. You've suggested that the Baltic States are not a part of NATO, just months ago you were unfamiliar with the major political parties and government in Israel, and domestically, you thought Alan Greenspan had been treasury secretary instead of federal reserve chair. 
Aren't these basic mistakes, and don't they raise legitimate questions about whether you are ready to be president? 
CARSON: Well, I could take issue with -- with all of those things, but we don't have time. 
But I will say, we have a debate here tonight, and we will have an opportunity to explore those areas, and I'm looking very much forward to demonstrating that, in fact, the thing that is probably most important is having a brain, and to be able to figure things out and learn things very rapidly. 
So, you know, experience comes from a large number of different arenas, and America became a great nation early on not because it was flooded with politicians, but because it was flooded with people who understood the value of personal responsibility, hard work, creativity, innovation, and that's what will get us on the right track now, as well. 
WALLACE: Senator Rubio, when Jeb Bush announced his candidacy for presidency, he said this: "There's no passing off responsibility when you're a governor, no blending into the legislative crowd." 
Could you please address Governor Bush across the stage here, and explain to him why you, someone who has never held executive office, are better prepared to be president than he is, a man who you say did a great job running your state of Florida for eight years. 
RUBIO: Well, thank you for the question, Chris, and it's great to be here tonight. Let me begin by saying this: I'm not new to the political process; I was making a contribution as the speaker of the third largest and most diverse state in the country well before I even got into the Senate. 
I would add to that that this election cannot be a resume competition. It's important to be qualified, but if this election is a resume competition, then Hillary Clinton's gonna be the next president, because she's been in office and in government longer than anybody else running here tonight. 
Here's what this election better be about: This election better be about the future, not the past. It better be about the issues our nation and the world is facing today, not simply the issues we once faced. 
This country is facing an economy that has been radically transformed. You know, the largest retailer in the country and the world today, Amazon, doesn't even own a single store? And these changes have been disruptive. They have changed people's lives. The jobs that once sustained our middle class, they either don't pay enough or they are gone, and we need someone that understands that as our nominee. 
If I'm our nominee, how is Hillary Clinton gonna lecture me about living paycheck to paycheck? I was raised paycheck to paycheck. How is she -- how is she gonna lecture me -- how is she gonna lecture me about student loans? I owed over $100,000 just four years ago. 
If I'm our nominee, we will be the party of the future. [applause] 
BAIER: Governor Bush, you have insisted that you're your own man. You say you have a life experience uniquely your own. Not your father's, not your brother's. 
But there are several opponents on this stage who get big- applause lines in early voting states with this line: quote, "the last thing the country needs is another Bush in the Oval Office." 
So do you understand the real concern in this country about dynastic politics? 
BUSH: Absolutely, I do, and I'm gonna run hard, run with heart, and run to win. 
I'm gonna have to earn this. Maybe the barrier -- the bar's even higher for me. That's fine. 
I've got a record in Florida. I'm proud of my dad, and I'm certainly proud of my brother. In Florida, they called me Jeb, because I earned it. 
I cut taxes every year, totaling $19 billion. We were -- we had -- we balanced every budget. We went from $1 billion of reserves to $9 billion of reserves. 
We were one of two states that went to AAA bond rating. 
They keep -- they called me Veto Corleone. Because I vetoed 2,500 separate line-items in the budget. [applause] 
I am my own man. I governed as a conservative, and I govern effectively. And the net effect was, during my eight years, 1.3 million jobs were created. We left the state better off because I applied conservative principles in a purple state the right way, and people rose up. [applause] 
KELLY: Mr. Trump, one of the things people love about you is you speak your mind and you don't use a politician's filter. However, that is not without its downsides, in particular, when it comes to women. 
You've called women you don't like "fat pigs, dogs, slobs, and disgusting animals." [laughter] Your Twitter account... 
TRUMP: Only Rosie O'Donnell. [laughter] 
KELLY: No, it wasn't. [applause] Your Twitter account... [applause] 
TRUMP: Thank you. 
KELLY : For the record , it was well beyond Rosie O'Donnell . 

TRUMP : Yes , I 'm sure it was . 

KELLY : Your Twitter account has several disparaging comments about women 's looks . You once told a contestant on Celebrity Apprentice it would be a pretty picture to see her on her knees . Does that sound to you like the temperament of a man we should elect as president , and how will you answer the charge from Hillary Clinton , who was likely to be the Democratic nominee , that you are part of the war on women ? 

TRUMP : I think the big problem this country has is being politically correct . [ applause ] I 've been challenged by so many people , and I do n't frankly have time for total political correctness . And to be honest with you , this country does n't have time either . This country is in big trouble . We do n't win anymore . We lose to China . We lose to Mexico both in trade and at the border . We lose to everybody . And frankly , what I say , and oftentimes it 's fun , it 's kidding . We have a good time . What I say is what I say . And honestly Megyn , if you do n't like it , I 'm sorry . I 've been very nice to you , although I could probably maybe not be , based on the way you have treated me . But I would n't do that . [ applause ] But you know what , we -- we need strength , we need energy , we need quickness and we need brain in this country to turn it around . That , I can tell you right now . 
WALLACE : Senator Cruz , your colleague , Senator Paul , right there next to you , said a few months ago he agrees with you on a number of issues , but he says you do nothing to grow the party . He says you feed red meat to the base , but you do n't reach out to minorities . You have a toxic relationship with GOP leaders in Congress . You even called the Republican Senate Leader Mitch McConnell a liar recently . [ applause ] How can you win in 2016 when you 're such a divisive figure ? 

CRUZ : Chris , I believe the American people are looking for someone to speak the truth . [ applause ] If you 're looking for someone to go to Washington , to go along to get along , to get -- to agree with the career politicians in both parties who get in bed with the lobbyists and special interests , then I ai n't your guy . There is a reason that we have $ 18 trillion in debt . Because as conservatives , as Republicans , we keep winning elections . We got a Republican House , we 've got a Republican Senate , and we do n't have leaders who honor their commitments . I will always tell the truth and do what I said I would do . [ applause ] 
BAIER : Governor Christie , you 're not exactly the darling of conservatives . You tout your record as a Republican governor in a blue state . On Facebook , the most people talking about you , not surprisingly , come from your state of New Jersey , and one of the top issues they are talking about is the economy . This -- this may be why . Under your watch , New Jersey has undergone nine credit rating downgrades . The state 's 44th in private sector growth . You face an employee pension crisis and the Garden State has the third highest foreclosure rate in the country . So why should voters believe that your management of the country 's finances would be any different ? 

CHRISTIE : If you think it 's bad now , you should 've seen it when I got there . [ laught and applause ] The fact is -- the fact is , in the eight years before I became governor , taxes and fees were raised at the state level 115 times . In the eight years before I became governor , spending was increased 56 percent . And in the eight years before I become governor , there was zero net private sector job growth in New Jersey . Zero . For eight years . So , what did we do ? We came in , we balanced an $ 11 billion deficit on a $ 29 billion budget by cutting over 800 programs in the state budget . We brought the budget into balance with no tax increases . In fact , we vetoed five income tax increases during my time as governor . We cut business taxes $ 2.3 billion , and we cut regulation by one-third of what my predecessor put in place . And , what 's happened since ? A hundred ninety-two thousand private sector jobs in the five and a half years I 've been governor . We have a lot of work to do in New Jersey , but I am darn proud we 've brought our state back . [ applause ] 
KELLY : Governor Walker , you 've consistently said that you want to make abortion illegal even in cases of rape , incest , or to save the life of the mother . You recently signed an abortion law in Wisconsin that does have an exception for the mother 's life , but you 're on the record as having objected to it . Would you really let a mother die rather than have an abortion , and with 83 percent of the American public in favor of a life exception , are you too out of the mainstream on this issue to win the general election ? 

WALKER : Well , I 'm pro-life , I 've always been pro-life , and I 've got a position that I think is consistent with many Americans out there in that ... [ applause ] ... in that I believe that that is an unborn child that 's in need of protection out there , and I 've said many a time that that unborn child can be protected , and there are many other alternatives that can also protect the life of that mother . That 's been consistently proven . Unlike Hillary Clinton , who has a radical position in terms of support for Planned Parenthood , I defunded Planned Parenthood more than four years ago , long before any of these videos came out ... [ applause ] ... I 've got a position that 's in line with everyday America . [ applause ] 
WALLACE : Governor Huckabee , like Governor Walker , you have staked out strong positions on social issues . You favor a constitutional amendment banning same sex marriage . You favor a constitutional amendment banning abortions , except for the life of the mother . Millions of people in this country agree with you , but according to the polls , and again this an electability question , according to the polls , more people do n't , so how do you persuade enough Independents and Democrats to get elected in 2016 ? 

HUCKABEE : Chris , I disagree with the idea that the real issue is a constitutional amendment . That 's a long and difficult process . I 've actually taken the position that 's bolder than that . A lot of people are talking about defunding planned parenthood , as if that 's a huge game changer . I think it 's time to do something even more bold . I think the next president ought to invoke the Fifth , and Fourteenth Amendments to the constitution now that we clearly know that that baby inside the mother 's womb is a person at the moment of conception . The reason we know that it is is because of the DNA schedule that we now have clear scientific evidence on . And , this notion that we just continue to ignore the personhood of the individual is a violation of that unborn child 's Fifth and 14th Amendment rights for due process and equal protection under the law . It 's time that we recognize the Supreme Court is not the Supreme Being , and we change the policy to be pro-life and protect children instead of rip up their body parts and sell them like they 're parts to a Buick . [ applause ] 
BAIER : Senator Paul , you recently blamed the rise of ISIS on Republican hawks . You later said that that statement , you could have said it better . But , the statement went on , and you said , quote , `` Everything they 've talked about in foreign policy , they 've been wrong for the last 20 years . '' Why are you so quick to blame your own party ? 

PAUL : First of all , only ISIS is responsible for the terrorism . Only ISIS is responsible for the depravity . But , we do have to examine , how are we going to defeat ISIS ? I 've got a proposal . I 'm the leading voice in America for not arming the allies of ISIS . [ applause ] I 've been fighting amidst a lot of opposition from both Hillary Clinton , as well as some Republicans who wanted to send arms to the allies of ISIS . ISIS rides around in a billion dollars worth of U.S. Humvees . It 's a disgrace . We 've got to stop -- we should n't fund our enemies , for goodness sakes . So , we did n't create ISIS -- ISIS created themselves , but we will stop them , and one of the ways we stop them is by not funding them , and not arming them . [ applause ] 
KELLY : Governor Kasich , You chose to expand Medicaid in your state , unlike several other governors on this stage tonight , and it is already over budget by some estimates costing taxpayers an additional $ 1.4 billion in just the first 18 months . You defended your Medicaid expansion by invoking God , saying to skeptics that when they arrive in heaven , Saint Peter is n't going to ask them how small they 've kept government , but what they have done for the poor . Why should Republican voters , who generally want to shrink government , believe that you wo n't use your Saint Peter rationale to expand every government program ? 

KASICH : Well , first of all ... [ applause ] ... first of all , Megyn , you should know that -- that President Reagan expanded Medicaid three or four times . Secondly , I had an opportunity to bring resources back to Ohio to do what ? To treat the mentally ill . Ten thousand of them sit in our prisons . It costs $ 22,500 a year ... [ applause ] ... to keep them in prison . I 'd rather get them their medication so they could lead a decent life . Secondly , we are rehabbing the drug-addicted . Eighty percent of the people in our prisons have addictions or problems . We now treat them in the prisons , release them in the community and the recidivism rate is 10 percent and everybody across this country knows that the tsunami of drugs is -- is threatening their very families . So we 're treating them and getting them on their feet . And , finally , the working poor , instead of them having come into the emergency rooms where it costs more , where they 're sicker and we end up paying , we brought a program in here to make sure that people could get on their feet . And do you know what ? Everybody has a right to their God-given purpose . And finally , our Medicaid is growing at one of the lowest rates in the country . And , finally , we went from $ 8 billion in the hole to $ 2 billion in the black . We 've cut $ 5 billion in taxes ... [ timer sounds ] ... and we 've grown 350,000 jobs . [ applause ] 
WALLACE: Gentlemen, we're turning to a new subject that all of you have been talking about and some of you have been disagreeing about, and that is the issue of immigration. 
Governor Bush, you released a new plan this week on illegal immigration focusing on enforcement, which some suggest is your effort to show that you're not soft on that issue. 
I want to ask you about a statement that you made last year about illegal immigrants. And here's what you said. "They broke the law, but it's not a felony, it's an act of love. It's an act of commitment to your family." 
Do you stand by that statement and do you stand by your support for earned legal status? 
BUSH: I do. I believe that the great majority of people coming here illegally have no other option. They want to provide for their family. 
But we need to control our border. It's not -- it's our responsibility to pick and choose who comes in. So I -- I've written a book about this and yet this week, I did come up with a comprehensive strategy that -- that really mirrored what we said in the book, which is that we need to deal with E-Verify, we need to deal with people that come with a legal visa and overstay. 
We need to be much more strategic on how we deal with border enforcement, border security. We need to eliminate the sanctuary cities in this country. It is ridiculous and tragic...[applause]...that people are dying because of the fact that -- that local governments are not following the federal law. There's much to do. And I think rather than talking about this as a wedge issue, which Barack Obama has done now for six long years, the next president -- and I hope to be that president -- will fix this once and for all so that we can turn this into a driver for high sustained economic growth. 
And there should be a path to earned legal status...[timer sounds] ...for those that are here. Not -- not amnesty, earned legal status, which means you pay a fine and do many things over an extended period of time. 
WALLACE: Thank you, sir. [applause] Mr. Trump, it has not escaped anybody's notice that you say that the Mexican government, the Mexican government is sending criminals -- rapists, drug dealers, across the border. 
Governor Bush has called those remarks, quote, "extraordinarily ugly." 
I'd like you -- you're right next to him -- tell us -- talk to him directly and say how you respond to that and -- and you have repeatedly said that you have evidence that the Mexican government is doing this, but you have evidence you have refused or declined to share. 
Why not use this first Republican presidential debate to share your proof with the American people? 
TRUMP: So, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't even be talking about illegal immigration, Chris. You wouldn't even be talking about it. [applause] This was not a subject that was on anybody's mind until I brought it up at my announcement. And I said, Mexico is sending. Except the reporters, because they're a very dishonest lot, generally speaking, in the world of politics, they didn't cover my statement the way I said it. 
The fact is, since then, many killings ,murders, crime, drugs pouring across the border, are money going out and the drugs coming in. And I said we need to build a wall, and it has to be built quickly. 
And I don't mind having a big beautiful door in that wall so that people can come into this country legally. But we need, Jeb, to build a wall, we need to keep illegals out. [cheering and applause] 
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I'll give you 30 seconds -- I'll give you 30 seconds to answer my question, which was, what evidence do you have, specific evidence that the Mexican government is sending criminals across the border? Thirty seconds. 
TRUMP: Border Patrol, I was at the border last week. Border Patrol, people that I deal with, that I talk to, they say this is what's happening. Because our leaders are stupid. Our politicians are stupid. 
And the Mexican government is much smarter, much sharper, much more cunning. And they send the bad ones over because they don't want to pay for them. They don't want to take care of them. 
Why should they when the stupid leaders of the United States will do it for them? And that's what is happening whether you like it or not. [cheering and applause] 
WALLACE: All right. Obviously there's a lot more to talk about this. We're going to have more questions for the candidates on illegal immigration, plus other key topics including your questions on Facebook. 
[video clip begins] 
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: What will be your plan on making immigration easier for those that want to do it legally? 
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: What specific steps would you take to contain the growth of ISIS? 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I'd like to know what the candidates are going to do so that I feel safe in my own country again. 
[video clip ends] 
[commercial break] 
WALLACE : Welcome back to FOX News/Facebook Republican Debate Night . We 're going to continue the questions now on illegal immigration . We kind of ended with a cliffhanger there . So let 's continue the conversation . Governor Kasich , I know you do n't like to talk about Donald Trump . But I do want to ask you about the merit of what he just said . When you say that the American government is stupid , that the Mexican government is sending criminals , that we 're being bamboozled , is that an adequate response to the question of illegal immigration ? KASICH : Chris , first of all , I was just saying to Chris Christie , they say we 're outspoken , we need to take lessons from Donald Trump if we 're really going to learn it . Here is the thing about Donald Trump . Donald Trump is hitting a nerve in this country . He is . He 's hitting a nerve . People are frustrated . They 're fed up . They do n't think the government is working for them . And for people who want to just tune him out , they 're making a mistake . Now , he 's got his solutions . Some of us have other solutions . You know , look , I balanced the federal budget as one of the chief architects when I was in Washington . Has n't been done since . I was a military reformer . I took the state of Ohio from an $ 8 billion hole and a 350,000 job loss to a $ 2 billion surplus and a gain of 350,000 jobs . WALLACE : Respectfully , can we talk about illegal immigration ? KASICH : But the point is that we all have solutions . Mr. Trump is touching a nerve because people want the wall to be built . They want to see an end to illegal immigration . They want to see it , and we all do . But we all have different ways of getting there . And you 're going to hear from all of us tonight about what our ideas are . WALLACE : All right , well , Senator Rubio , let me see if I can do better with you . Is it as simple as our leaders are stupid , their leaders are smart , and all of these illegals coming over are criminals ? RUBIO : Let me set the record straight on a couple of things . The first is , the evidence is now clear that the majority of people coming across the border are not from Mexico . They 're coming from Guatemala , El Salvador , Honduras . Those countries are the source of the people that are now coming in its majority . I also believe we need a fence . The problem is if El Chapo builds a tunnel under the fence , we have to be able to deal with that too . And that 's why you need an e-verify system and you need an entry-exit tracking system and all sorts of other things to prevent illegal immigration . But I agree with what Governor Kasich just said . People are frustrated . This is the most generous country in the world when it comes to immigration . There are a million people a year who legally immigrate to the United States , and people feel like we 're being taken advantage of . We feel like despite our generosity , we 're being taken advantage of . And let me tell you who never gets talked about in these debates . The people that call my office , who have been waiting for 15 years to come to the United States . And they 've paid their fees , and they hired a lawyer , and they ca n't get in . And they 're wondering , maybe they should come illegally . [ applause ] And so these are important issues , and we should address it . It 's a serious problem that needs to be addressed , and otherwise we 're going to keep talking about this for the next 30 years , like we have for the last 30 years . WALLACE : Governor Walker . [ applause ] Governor Walker , from 2002 until as recently as 2013 , just two years ago , you supported comprehensive immigration reform , including a path to citizenship . Now you say that was a quick reaction to something you had n't really thought about , and that you 've changed your mind . Other than politics , could you explain why in the last two years you 've changed your position on a path to citizenship , and are there other past positions that we should n't hold you to ? WALKER : Chris , I actually said that on your show earlier this year . [ crosstalk ] I acknowledged that . I said I actually listened to the American people . And I think people across America want a leader who 's actually going to listen to them . I talked to border state governors and other elected officials . I look at how this president , particularly through last November , messed up the immigration system in this country . Most importantly , I listened to the people of America . I believe we need to secure the border . I 've been to the border with Governor Abbott in Texas and others , seeing the problems that they have there . There is international criminal organizations penetrating our southern based borders , and we need to do something about it . Secure the border , enforce the law , no amnesty , and go forward with the legal immigration system that gives priority to American working families and wages . [ applause ] WALLACE : Senator Cruz , some 1,400 people submitted questions on this very hot topic of illegal immigration on Facebook , and a number of them were about the murder of Kate Steinle in San Francisco , allegedly shot down by an illegal . Doug Bettencourt sent this question , `` will you support Kate Steinle 's Law , '' which would impose a mandatory five-year prison term for an illegal who is deported and then returns to this country ? `` And will you defund sanctuary cities for violating federal law ? '' CRUZ : Chris , absolutely yes . And not only will I support it ... [ applause ] ... I have authored Kate 's law in the United States Senate and filed that legislation . I tried to get the Senate to vote to pass Kate 's law on the floor of the Senate just one week ago , and the leader of our own party blocked a vote on Kate 's law . You know , there was reference made to our leaders being stupid . It 's not a question of stupidity . It 's that they do n't want to enforce the immigration laws . That there are far too many in the Washington cartel that support amnesty . President Obama has talked about fundamentally transforming this country . There 's 7 billion people across the face of the globe , many of whom want to come to this country . If they come legally , great . But if they come illegally and they get amnesty , that is how we fundamentally change this country , and it really is striking . A majority of the candidates on this stage have supported amnesty . I have never supported amnesty , and I led the fight against Chuck Schumer 's gang of eight amnesty legislation in the Senate .KELLY : Alright , gentlemen , we 're gon na switch topics now and talk a bit about terror and national security . Governor Christie . You 've said that Senator Paul 's opposition to the NSA 's collection of phone records has made the United States weaker and more vulnerable , even going so far as to say that he should be called before Congress to answer for it if we should be hit by another terrorist attack . Do you really believe you can assign blame to Senator Paul just for opposing the bulk collection of people 's phone records in the event of a terrorist attack ? CHRISTIE : Yes , I do . And I 'll tell you why : because I 'm the only person on this stage who 's actually filed applications under the Patriot Act , who has gone before the federal -- the Foreign Intelligence Service court , who has prosecuted and investigated and jailed terrorists in this country after September 11th . I was appointed U.S. attorney by President Bush on September 10th , 2001 , and the world changed enormously the next day , and that happened in my state . This is not theoretical to me . I went to the funerals . We lost friends of ours in the Trade Center that day . My own wife was two blocks from the Trade Center that day , at her office , having gone through it that morning . When you actually have to be responsible for doing this , you can do it , and we did it , for seven years in my office , respecting civil liberties and protecting the homeland . And I will make no apologies , ever , for protecting the lives and the safety of the American people . We have to give more tools to our folks to be able to do that , not fewer , and then trust those people and oversee them to do it the right way . As president , that is exactly what I 'll do . PAUL : Megyn , may I respond ? [ applause ] May I respond ? KELLY : Go ahead , sir . PAUL : I want to collect more records from terrorists , but less records from innocent Americans . The Fourth Amendment was what we fought the Revolution over ! John Adams said it was the spark that led to our war for independence , and I 'm proud of standing for the Bill of Rights , and I will continue to stand for the Bill of Rights . [ applause ] CHRISTIE : And -- and , Megyn ? Megyn , that 's a -- that , you know , that 's a completely ridiculous answer . `` I want to collect more records from terrorists , but less records from other people . '' How are you supposed to know , Megyn ? PAUL : Use the Fourth Amendment ! CHRISTIE : What are you supposed to ... PAUL : Use the Fourth Amendment ! CHRISTIE : ... how are you supposed to -- no , I 'll tell you how you , look ... PAUL : Get a warrant ! CHRISTIE : Let me tell you something , you go ... 
PAUL : Get a judge to sign the warrant ! CHRISTIE : When you -- you know , senator ... [ crosstalk ] KELLY : Governor Christie , make your point . 
CHRISTIE : Listen , senator , you know , when you 're sitting in a subcommittee , just blowing hot air about this , you can say things like that . [ applause ] When you 're responsible for protecting the lives of the American people , then what you need to do is to make sure is to make sure that you use the system the way it 's supposed to work . PAUL : Here 's the problem , governor . Here 's the problem , governor . You fundamentally misunderstand the Bill of Rights . Every time you did a case , you got a warrant from a judge . I 'm talking about searches without warrants indiscriminately , of all Americans ' records , and that 's what I fought to end . I do n't trust President Obama with our records . I know you gave him a big hug , and if you want to give him a big hug again , go right ahead . [ applause ] KELLY : Go ahead , governor . CHRISTIE : And you know -- you know , Senator Paul ? Senator Paul , you know , the hugs that I remember are the hugs that I gave to the families who lost their people on September 11th . Those are the hugs I remember , and those had nothing to do -- and those had nothing to do with politics , unlike what you 're doing by cutting speeches on the floor of the Senate , then putting them on the Internet within half an hour to raise money for your campaign and while still putting our country at risk . [ crosstalk ] KELLY : Alright , we 've got ta cut it off there . We have plenty more we want to get to . That was an interesting exchange , thank you for that . CHRISTIE : You know what , Megyn , can I ... KELLY : Well , I want to move on , because I have -- we 're gon na get to you , governor , but I -- I really wan na get to a Facebook questioner . His name is Alex Chalgren , and he has the following question : [ video clip begins ] QUESTION : : My question is , how would the candidates stop the treacherous actions of ISIS -- ISIL and its growing influence in the U.S. , if they were to become president ? [ video clip ends ]KELLY: Senator Cruz, I wanna talk to you about this, because many of the Facebook users and -- and -- the -- the folks on Facebook wanted the candidates to speak to ISIS tonight. 
You asked the chairman of the joint chiefs a question: "What would it take to destroy ISIS in 90 days?" He told you "ISIS will only be truly destroyed once they are rejected by the populations in which they hide." And then you accused him of pushing Medicaid for the Iraqis. 
How would you destroy ISIS in 90 days? 
CRUZ: Megyn, we need a commander in chief that speaks the truth. We will not defeat radical Islamic terrorism so long as we have a president unwilling to utter the words, "radical Islamic terrorism". [applause] 
When I asked General Dempsey, the chairman of the joint chiefs, what would be required militarily to destroy ISIS, he said there is no military solution. We need to change the conditions on the ground so that young men are not in poverty and susceptible to radicalization. That, with all due respect, is nonsense. 
It's the same answer the State Department gave that we need to give them jobs. What we need is a commander in chief who makes -- clear, if you join ISIS, if you wage jihad on America, then you are signing your death warrant. 
KELLY: You don't see it as... [applause] ...an ideological problem -- an ideological problem in addition to a military one? [applause] 
CRUZ: Megyn, of course it's an ideological problem, that's one of the reasons I introduce the Expatriate Terrorist Act in the Senate that said if any American travels to the Middle East and joining ISIS, that he or she forfeits their citizenship so they don't use a passport to come back and wage jihad on Americans. [applause] 
Yes, it is ideological, and let me contrast President Obama, who at the prayer breakfast, essentially acted as an apologist. He said, "Well, gosh, the crusades, the inquisitions--"[timer sounds] 
We need a president that shows the courage that Egypt's President al-Sisi did, a Muslim, when he called out the radical Islamic terrorists who are threatening the world. [applause] 
KELLY: Governor Bush, for days on end in this campaign, you struggled to answer a question about whether knowing what we know now... 
BUSH: ...I remember... 
KELLY: ...we would've invaded Iraq... 
BUSH: ...I remember, Megyn. [laughter] 
KELLY: I remember it too, and ISIS, of course, is now thriving there. 
You finally said, "No." 
To the families of those who died in that war who say they liberated a country and deposed a ruthless dictator, how do you look at them now and say that your brothers war was a mistake? 
BUSH: Knowing what we know now, with faulty intelligence, and not having security be the first priority when -- when we invaded, it was a mistake. I wouldn't have gone in, however, for the people that did lose their lives, and the families that suffer because of it -- I know this full well because as governor of the state of Florida, I called every one of them. Every one of them that I could find to tell them that I was praying for them, that I cared about them, and it was really hard to do. 
And, every one of them said that their child did not die in vain, or their wife, of their husband did not die in vain. 
So, while it was difficult for me to do it was based on that. Here's the lesson that we should take from this, which relates to this whole subject. Barack Obama became president, and he abandoned Iraq. He left, and when he left Al Qaida was done for. ISIS was created because [timer sounds] of the void that we left, and that void now exists as a caliphate the size of Indiana. 
To honor the people that died, we need to -- we need to --- stop the -- Iran agreement, for sure, because the Iranian mullahs have their blood on their hands, and we need to take out ISIS with every tool at our disposal. [applause] 
KELLY: Governor Walker, in February you said that we needed to gain partners in the Arab world. Which Arab country not already in the U.S. led coalition has potential to be our greatest partner? 
WALKER: I don't know about additional ones. We need to focus on the ones we have. You look at Egypt, probably the best relationship we've had in Israel, at least in my lifetime, incredibly important. 
You look at the Saudis -- in fact, earlier this year, I met with Saudi leaders, and leaders from the United Arab Emirates, and I asked them what's the greatest challenge in the world today? Set aside the Iran deal. They said it's the disengagement of America. We are leading from behind under the Obama-Clinton doctrine -- America's a great country. We need to stand up and start leading again, and we need to have allies, not just in Israel, but throughout the Persian Gulf. 
KELLY: Dr. Carson, in one of his first acts as commander in chief, President Obama signed an executive order banning enhanced interrogation techniques in fighting terror. As president, would you bring back water boarding? 
CARSON: Well, thank you, Megyn, I wasn't sure I was going to get to talk again. [applause] 
KELLY: We have a lot for you, don't worry. [laughter and applause] Fear not, you may rue that request. 
CARSON: Alright. You know, what we do in order to get the information that we need is our business, and I wouldn't necessarily be broadcasting what we're going to do. [applause] 
We. . .uh. . .we've gotten into this -- this mindset of fighting politically correct wars. There is no such thing as a politically correct war. [applause] 
And, the left, of course, will say Carson doesn't believe in the Geneva Convention. Carson doesn't believe in fighting stupid wars. And -- and what we have to remember is we want to utilize the tremendous intellect that we have in the military to win wars. 
And I've talked to a lot of the generals, a lot of our advanced people. And believe me, if we gave them the mission, which is what the commander-in-chief does, they would be able to carry it out. 
And if we don't tie their hands behind their back, they will do it...[timer sounds]...extremely effectively. [applause] 
BAIER: Gentlemen, the next series of questions deals with ObamaCare and the role of the federal government. 
Mr. Trump, ObamaCare is one of the things you call a disaster. 
TRUMP: A complete disaster, yes. 
BAIER : Saying it needs to be repealed and replaced . 
TRUMP : Correct . 
BAIER : Now , 15 years ago , you called yourself a liberal on health care . You were for a single-payer system , a Canadian-style system . Why were you for that then and why are n't you for it now ? 
TRUMP : First of all , I 'd like to just go back to one . In July of 2004 , I came out strongly against the war with Iraq , because it was going to destabilize the Middle East . And I 'm the only one on this stage that knew that and had the vision to say it . And that 's exactly what happened . 
BAIER : But on ObamaCare ... 
TRUMP : And the Middle East became totally destabilized . So I just want to say . As far as single payer , it works in Canada . It works incredibly well in Scotland . It could have worked in a different age , which is the age you 're talking about here . What I 'd like to see is a private system without the artificial lines around every state . I have a big company with thousands and thousands of employees . And if I 'm negotiating in New York or in New Jersey or in California , I have like one bidder . Nobody can bid . You know why ? Because the insurance companies are making a fortune because they have control of the politicians , of course , with the exception of the politicians on this stage . But they have total control of the politicians . They 're making a fortune . Get rid of the artificial lines and you will have ... [ timer sounds ] ... yourself great plans . And then we have to take care of the people that can't take care of themselves . And I will do that through a different system . [ crosstalk ] 
BAIER : Mr. Trump , hold up one second . PAUL : I 've got a news flash ... 
BAIER : All right , now , hold on , Senator Paul ... 
PAUL : News flash , the Republican Party 's been fighting against a single-payer system ... 
BAIER : OK. 
PAUL : -- for a decade . So I think you 're on the wrong side of this if you 're still arguing for a single-payer system . 
TRUMP : I 'm not -- I 'm not are -- I don't think you heard me . You 're having a hard time tonight . 
BAIER : All right , let me ... [ applause ] Mr. Trump , it 's not just your past support for single- payer health care . You 've also supported a host of other liberal policies . Use -- you 've also donated to several Democratic candidates , Hillary Clinton included , Nancy Pelosi . You explained away those donations saying you did that to get business-related favors . And you said recently , quote , `` When you give , they do whatever the hell you want them to do . '' 
TRUMP : You 'd better believe it . 
BAIER : So what specifically did ... 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : That 's true . 

BAIER : -- they do ? 

TRUMP : If I ask them , if I need them , you know , most of the people on this stage I 've given to , just so you understand , a lot of money . 

RUBIO : Not me . 

HUCKABEE : Not me . [ laughter ] But you 're welcome to give me a check , Donald if you 'd like . 

TRUMP : Many of them . 

RUBIO : Actually , to be clear ... [ crosstalk ] ... he supported Charlie Crist . 

TRUMP : Not much . 

RUBIO : Hey , Charlie ... [ crosstalk ] 

TRUMP : But I ... [ crosstalk ] 

KASICH : Donald , if you ... [ crosstalk ] 

TRUMP : I have good ... 

KASICH : -- this campaign , I hope you will give to me . 

TRUMP : Good . 

KASICH : OK. 

TRUMP : Sounds good . Sounds good to me , Governor . I will tell you that our system is broken . I gave to many people , before this , before two months ago , I was a businessman . I give to everybody . When they call , I give . And do you know what ? When I need something from them two years later , three years later , I call them , they are there for me . 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : So what did you get ? TRUMP : And that 's a broken system . 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : What did you get from Hillary Clinton and Nancy Pelosi ? 

TRUMP : Well , I 'll tell you what , with Hillary Clinton , I said be at my wedding and she came to my wedding . You know why ? She did n't have a choice because I gave . I gave to a foundation that , frankly , that foundation is supposed to do good . I did n't know her money would be used on private jets going all over the world . It was . But ... [ timer sounds ] [ crosstalk ] 

BAIER : Hold on . We 're going to -- we're going to move on . [crosstalk ] We 'll come back to you, Governor Walker . 

WALKER : Just one second on this , though . We -- we spent a lot of time talking about Hillary Clinton and -- -and pitting us back and forth . Let 's be clear , we should be talking about Hillary Clinton on that last subject , because everywhere in the world that Hillary Clinton touched is more messed up today than before she and the president [ inaudible ] . 

BAIER : We have many questions to come. 

WALKER : It 's true . BAIER : Many questions to come . [ applause ] Governor Huckabee , on Facebook , John Pietricone asked this , `` Will you abolish or take away the powers and cut the size of the EPA , the IRS , the Department of Education ? '' Now , broadly ... [ applause ] ... broadly , the size of government is a big concern for Facebook users , Facebook persons , as well as , obviously , conservatives . But year after year , decade after decade , there are promises from Republicans to shrink government . But year after year , decade after decade , it does n't happen . In fact , it gets bigger , even under Republican politicians . So the question is , at this point , is the government simply too big for any one person , even a Republican , to shrink ? 

HUCKABEE : It 's not too big to shrink . But the problem is we have a Wall Street-to-Washington axis of power that has controlled the political climate . The donor class feeds the political class who does the dance that the donor class wants . And the result is federal government keeps getting bigger . Every person on this stage who has been a governor will tell that you the biggest fight they had was not the other party . Wasn't even the legislature . It was the federal government , who continually put mandates on the states that we had to suck up and pay for . And the fact is there are a lot of things happening at the federal level that are absolutely beyond the jurisdiction of the Constitution . This is power that should be shifted back to the states , whether it 's the EPA , there is no role at the federal level for the Department of Education . [ cheering and applause ] And I 'm still one who says that we can get rid of the Internal Revenue Service if we would pass the FairTax , which is a tax on consumption rather than a tax on people 's income , and move power back where the founders believed it should have been all along . 

BAIER : Dr. Carson ... 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : Bret , Bret , Bret ... 

BAIER : Dr. Carson , do you agree with that? 

CARSON : What I agree with is that we need a significantly changed taxation system . And the one that I've advocated is based on tithing , because I think God is a pretty fair guy . And he said , you know , if you give me a tithe , it doesn't matter how much you made . If you've had a bumper crop , you do n't owe me triple tithes . And if you 've had no crops at all , you don't owe me no tithes . So there must be something inherently fair about that . And that 's why I 've advocated a proportional tax system . You make $ 10 billion , you pay a billion . You make $ 10 , you pay one . And everybody gets treated the same way . And you get rid of the deductions , you get rid of all the loopholes , and ... [ timer sounds ] 

BAIER : Governor Bush ? 

CARSON : And I have a lot more to say about it . 

BAIER : We 're going to come back to you , Dr. Carson . Governor Bush , you are one of the few people on the stage who advocates for Common Core education standards , reading and math . A lot of people on this stage vigorously oppose a federal involvement in education . They say it should all be handled locally . President Obama 's secretary of education , Arnie Duncan , has said that most of the criticism of Common Core is due to a , quote , `` fringe group of critics . '' Do you think that 's accurate ? 

BUSH : No , I don't . And I don't believe the federal government should be involved in the creation of standards directly or indirectly , the creation of curriculum or content . It is clearly a state responsibility . I'm for higher standards ... [ applause ] ... measured in an intellectually honest way , with abundant school choice , ending social promotion . And I know how to do this because as governor of the state of Florida I created the first statewide voucher program in the country , the second statewide voucher program , in the country and the third statewide voucher program in the country . And we had rising student achievement across the board , because high standards , robust accountability , ending social promotion in third grade , real school choice across the board , challenging the teachers union and beating them is the way to go . And Florida 's low income kids had the greatest gains inside the country . Our graduation rate improved by 50 percent . That 's what I 'm for . 

BAIER : Senator Rubio , why is Governor Bush wrong on Common Core ? 

RUBIO : Well , first off , I too believe in curriculum reform . It is critically important in the 21st Century . We do need curriculum reform . And it should happen at the state and local level . That 's . . . that 's . . . that is where educational policy belongs , because if a parent is unhappy with what their child is being taught in school, they can go to that local school board or their state legislature, or their governor and get it changed . Here 's the problem with Common Core . The Department of Education, like every federal agency, will never be satisfied. They will not stop with it being a suggestion . They will turn it into a mandate . In fact , what they will begin to say to local communities is, you will not get federal money unless do you things the way we want you to do it . And they will use Common Core or any other requirements that exists nationally to force it down the throats of our people in our states . [ applause ] 

BAIER : And do you agree with your old friend ? 

BUSH : He is definitely my friend . And I think the states ought to create these standards . And if states want to opt out of Common Core , fine . Just make sure your standards are high . Because today in America, a third of our kids, after we spend more per student than any country in the world other than a couple rounding errors, to be honest with you , 30 percent are college- and/or career-ready . If we are going to compete in this world we 're in today , there is no possible way we can do it with lowering expectations and dumbing down everything . Children are going to suffer and families' hearts are going to be broken that their kids wo n't be able to get a job in the 21st Century . [ applause ] 

BAIER : We have many more questions coming on a host of topics , here from Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland . Stay with us . [ video clip begins ] 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : What would make stand out as the best choice for the Republican nomination ? 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : How do you intend to go about student loan reform ? 

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : What will be the first thing you will do to stimulate economic growth in our country and bring more jobs to the United States ? [ video clip ends ] [ commercial break ] 

BAIER : We have many more questions coming on a host of topics . Here from Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland . Stay with us . [ video clip begins ] 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : What would make you stand out as the best choice for the Republican nomination ? 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : How do you intend to go about student loan reform ? 

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : What will be the first thing you will do to stimulate economic growth in our country and bring more jobs to the United States ? [ video clip ends ] [ commercial break ] 
KELLY: It's just before 10:00 p.m. on the East Coast. Welcome back to Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio, and the very first Republican primary debate of the 2016 presidential campaign. Ten candidates on the stage, selected based on their standing in five national polls. And tonight they are facing off, answering the questions you want asked. We hope. [laughter] 

WALLACE: Gentlemen, we're obviously digging into some subjects in depth, but we're also going to change it up every once in a while throughout the next hour and have many rounds where we ask, you are not going to like it, only a couple of candidates questions on those subjects. This is the first of the many rounds, and it's about somebody whose name probably hasn't been mentioned enough so far tonight. 
Governor Kasich, let me start with you. Whoever the Republican nominee -- [applause] 
Whoever the Republican nominee is, it looks at least for now like whoever that nominee is, he or she, will be facing off against Hillary Clinton. You know how she will come after whoever the Republican nominee is. She will say that you, whoever it is, support the rich while she supports the middle class. That you want to suppress the rights of women and minorities. She wants to move the country forward while you, the Republicans, want to take the country back to the past. 
How will you, if you're the nominee, how will you answer that and take Hillary Clinton on? 

KASICH: Let's start off with my father being a mailman. So I understand the concerns of all the folks across this country, some of whom have trouble, you know, making ends meet. But I think she will come in a narrow way. The nominee of this party, if they're going to win, has got to come at it in a big way, which is pro-growth. Which is balancing budgets. You know, we were talking about it. People were saying, could we do it? I was the chairman of the Budget Committee and the lead architect the last time it happened in Washington, and when we did it we had great economic growth, we cut taxes, and we had a big surplus. 
Economic growth is the key. Economic growth is the key to everything. But once you have economic growth, it is important that we reach out to people who live in the shadows, the people who don't seem to ever think that they get a fair deal. And that includes people in our minority community; that includes people who feel as though they don't have a chance to move up. 
You know, America is a miracle country. And we have to restore the sense that the "Amiracle" will apply to you. Each and every one of the people in this country who's watching tonight, lift everybody, [timer sounds] unite everybody and build a stronger United States of America again. It will be and can be done. 

WALLACE: I know that all of you would like to answer this question, but we're only going to ask one other candidate before we move on to a different subject, Dr. Carson. 
Basically, same question to you. If Hillary Clinton is the nominee and she comes at you with that kind of line of attack, how will you take Iraq?
 
CARSON: If Hillary is the candidate, which I doubt, that would be a dream come true. [laughter] 
But you know, the fact of the matter is, she is the epitome of the progressive -- the secular progressive movement. And she counts on the fact that people are uninformed, the Alinsky Model, taking advantage of useful idiots. 
Well, I just happen to believe that people are not stupid. [applause] And the way I will come at it is to educate people, help people to actually understand that it is that progressive movement that is causing them the problems. 
You know, you look at the -- the national debt and how it's being driven up. If I was trying to destroy this country, what I would do is find a way to drive wedges between all the people, drive the debt to an unsustainable level, and then step off the stage as a world leader and let our enemies increase while we decreased our capacity as a military person. And that's what she's doing. [applause] 
WALLACE: Gentlemen, we're going to turn now to the subject of the economy, jobs and money and the government. And Governor Bush, I'm going to start with you. 
You have made a bold promise in your announcement. You have promised four percent economic growth and 19 million new jobs if you are fortunate enough to serve two terms as president. 
That many jobs, 19 million, would be triple what your father and your brother accomplished together. And four percent growth, the last president to average that was Lyndon Johnson during the height of the Vietnam War. So question, how on Earth specifically would you pull that off? 

BUSH: We've done it 27 times since World War II. I think we need to lift our spirits and have high, lofty expectations for this great country of ours. 
The new normal of two percent that the left is saying you can't do anything about is so dangerous for our country. There's 6 million people living in poverty today, more than when Barack Obama got elected. 6.5 million people are working part-time, most of whom want to work full-time. We've created rules and taxes on top of every aspiration of people, and the net result is we're not growing fast, income's not growing. A four percent growth strategy means you fix a convoluted tax code. You get in and you change every aspect of regulations that are job killers. You get rid of Obamacare and replace it with something that doesn't suppress wages and kill jobs. [applause] 
You embrace the energy revolution in our country. This president and Hillary Clinton, who can't even say she's for the XL pipeline even after she's left? Give me a break. Of course we're for it. We should be for these things to create high sustained economic growth. And frankly, [timer sounds] fixing our immigration system and turning it into an economic driver is part of this as well. We can do this. [applause] 
WALLACE : Governor Walker . [ applause ] Governor Walker , when you ran for governor of Wisconsin back in 2010 , you promised that you would create 250,000 jobs in your first term , first four years . In fact , Wisconsin added barely half that and ranked 35th in the country in job growth . Now you 're running for president , and you 're promising an economic plan in which everyone will earn a piece of the American dream . Given your record in Wisconsin , why should voters believe you ? 

WALKER : Well , the voters in Wisconsin elected me last year for the third time because they wanted someone who aimed high , not aimed low . Before I came in , the unemployment rate was over eight percent . It 's now down to 4.6 percent . We 've more than made up for the jobs that were lost during the recession . And the rate in which people are working is almost five points higher than it is nationally . You know , people like Hillary Clinton think you grow the economy by growing Washington . One report last year showed that six of the top 10 wealthiest counties in America were in or around Washington , D.C.. I think most of us in America understand that people , not the government creates jobs . And one of the best things we can do is get the government out of the way , repeal Obamacare , put in -- reign in all the out of control regulations , put in place an all of the above energy policy , give people the education , the skills that the need to succeed , and lower the tax rate and reform the tax code . That 's what I 'll do as president , just like I did in Wisconsin . [ applause ] 
WALLACE : Governor Christie , I want to engage you and Governor Huckabee in a subject that is a big issue in both of your campaigns , and that is entitlement reform . You say that you -- to save the system that you want to raise the retirement age -- have to raise the retirement age , and to cut benefits for Social Security and Medicare , and you say that some of the candidates here on the stage are lying . Governor Huckabee says he can save Social Security and Medicare without doing any of that . Is he lying ? 

CHRISTIE : No , he 's not lying , he 's just wrong . I mean , so , there 's a difference -- I 'm the only guy on this stage who 's put out a detailed , 12 point plan on entitlement reform and here 's why -- because 71 % of federal spending right now is on entitlements , and debt service , 71 % . And we have spent the last hour and five minutes talking about the other 29 % , and no time on the 71 % , and that makes no sense . Now , let me tell you exactly what we would do on Social Security . Yes , we 'd raise the retirement age two years , and phase it in over 25 years , that means we 'd raise it one month a year for 25 years when we 're all living longer , and living better lives . Secondly , we would means test Social Security for those who are making over $ 200,000 dollars a year in retirement income , and have $ 4 to $ 5 million dollars in liquid assets saved . They do n't need that Social Security check . Social Security is meant to be -- to make sure that no one who 's worked hard , and played by the rules , and paid into the system grows old in poverty in America . If we do n't deal with this problem , it will bankrupt our country , or lead to massive tax increases , neither one that we want in this country . [ applause ] 

WALLACE : Governor Huckabee ? You say that changing entitlements , the kind of thing that Governor Christie is talking about , would be breaking a promise to the American people , and you say that you can keep those programs , save Social Security , save Medicare , without those kinds of reforms through a FairTax , which is a broad tax on consumption . Please explain to Governor Christie how that would work , and how you could save these programs without the kind of painful reforms he says we need ? 

HUCKABEE : Well , let 's all be reminded , 60 million Americans are on Social Security , 60 million . A third of those people depend on 90 % of their income from Social Security . Nobody in this country is on Social Security because they made the decision when they were starting work at 14 that they wanted to trust some of their money with the government . The government took it out of their check whether they wanted them to or not . And , if person goes to 65 , they 're going to spend 51 years with the government reaching into their pocket at every paycheck . Now , here 's the point , whose fault is it that the system is screwed up ? Is it the recipients , or is it the government ? And , if Congress wants to mess with the retirement program , why do n't we let them start by changing their retirement program , and not have one , instead of talking about getting rid of Social Security and Medicare that was robbed $ 700 billion dollars to pay for Obamacare . It 's always that the government figures that they can do this off the backs of people , many of whom are poor , and depend on that money , and I just think it 's fundamentally lying to the people and stealing from them , and we should n't be doing it . [ applause ] 

CHRISTIE : Chris ... 

WALLACE : ... Thirty seconds . 

CHRISTIE : Yeah , sure . And , I do n't disagree with ending Congress ' retirement program . I 'm a governor , I do n't have a retirement program in my state , and I do n't disagree with that . But , here 's the news to the American people , he 's complaining about the lying and stealing . The lying and stealing has already occurred . The trust fund is filled with IOU 's . We ca n't fix the problem just by ending Congress 's retirement , that 's worth about , `` this '' much . We need to go at the fundamental problem , and the fundamental problem is that this system is broken . It has been stolen from . We have been lied to , [ timer sounds ] and we need a strong leader to tell the truth and fix ... 

WALLACE : ... Alright , this is it . Thirty Seconds , finally . 

HUCKABEE : Well , you ask about how we fund it . One of the reasons that Social Security is in so much trouble is that the only funding stream comes from people who get a wage . The people who get wages is declining dramatically . Most of the income in this country is made by people at the top who get dividends and -- and capital gains . The FairTax transforms the process by which we fund Social Security and Medicare because the money paid in consumption is paid by everybody , including illegals , prostitutes , pimps , drug dealers , all the people [ timer sounds ] that are freeloading off the system now . [ applause ] That 's why it ought to be a transformed system . [ applause ] 

WALLACE : All right . Enough . [ applause ] Mr. Trump . 
KELLY: [off mike] Sounds like somebody's a little R-rated. [applause] WALLACE : Mr. Trump , you talk a lot about how you are the person on this stage to grow the economy , I want to ask you about your business records . From corporations , Trump corporations , casinos and hotels , have declared bankruptcy four times over the last quarter-century.

UNKNOWN : ... In 2011 , you told Forbes Magazine this : `` I 've used the laws of the country to my advantage . '' But at the same time , financial experts involved in those bankruptcies say that lenders to your companies lost billions of dollars.Question sir , with that record , why should we trust you to run the nation 's business ? 

TRUMP : Because I have used the laws of this country just like the greatest people that you read about every day in business have used the laws of this country, the chapter laws , to do a great job for my company , for myself , for my employees , for my family , et cetera.I have never gone bankrupt, by the way . I have never.But out of hundreds of deals ... 

WALLACE : No , but the concept sir ... 

TRUMP : Excuse me . Excuse me.

WALLACE : ... that 's your line , but your companies have gone bankrupt.

TRUMP : Excuse me , what am I saying ? Out of hundreds of deals that I 've done , hundreds , on four occasions I 've taken advantage of the laws of this country , like other people . I'm not going to name their names because I'm not going to embarrass , but virtually every person that you read about on the front page of the business sections , they 've used the law.The difference is , when somebody else uses those laws , nobody writes about it . When I use it , they say , `` Trump , Trump , Trump . '' The fact is , I built a net worth of more than $ 10 billion . I have a great , great company . I employ thousands of people . And I'm very proud of the job I did. Again Chris , hundreds and hundreds of deals . Four times , I 've taken advantage of the laws . And frankly , so has everybody else in my position.

WALLACE : Well sir , let's just talk about the latest example ... [ applause ] ... which is Trump Entertainment Resorts , which went bankrupt in 2009 . In that case alone , lenders to your company lost over $ 1 billion and more than 1,100 people were laid off.TRUMP : Well , I ... 

WALLACE : Is that the way that you'd run the country ? 

TRUMP : Let me just tell you about the lenders . First of all , these lenders are n't babies . These are total killers . These are not the nice, sweet little people that you think, OK ? [ laughter and applause ] You know , I mean you're living in a world of the make-believe, Chris , you want to know the truth . [ applause ] And I had the good sense to leave Atlantic City , which by the way , Caesars just went bankrupt . Every company , Chris can tell you , every company virtually in Atlantic City went bankrupt . [ laughter ] Every company.And let me just tell you . I had the good sense, and I've gotten a lot of credit in the financial pages , seven years ago I left Atlantic City before it totally cratered , and I made a lot of money in Atlantic City , and I 'm very proud of it . I want to tell you that . Very , very proud of it.WALLACE : So ... TRUMP : And by the way , this country right now owes $ 19 trillion . And they need somebody like me to straighten out that mess . [ applause ] 
WALLACE : Senator Rubio . Senator Rubio, more than 3,000 people sent us questions about the economy and jobs on Facebook . And here is a video question from Tania Cioloko from Philadelphia . Here she is . [ begin video clip ] 
QUESTION : Please describe one action you would do to make the economic environment more favorable for small businesses and entrepreneurs and anyone dreaming of opening their own business . [ close video clip ] RUBIO : That 's a great question.
WALLACE : Senator , how do you answer Tania ? 
RUBIO : That's a great question. First of all , it begins by having leaders that recognize that the economy we live in today is dramatically different from the one we had five years ago . It's an economy that now has placed us in global competition with dozens of other countries around the world.Now , the big companies that have connections with Washington , they can affect policies to help them , but the small companies like the one Tania is talking about , they're the ones that are struggling.The first thing we need to do is we need to even out the tax code for small businesses so that we lower their tax rate to 25 percent , just as we need to lower it for all businesses.We need to have a regulatory budget in America that limits the amount of regulations on our economy . We need to repeal and replace Obamacare and we need to improve higher education so that people can have access to the skills they need for 21st century jobs.And last but not least , we need to repeal Dodd-Frank . It is eviscerating small businesses and small banks . [ applause ] 20  over 40 percent of small and mid-size banks that loan money to small businesses have been wiped out over the  since Dodd-Frank has passed . We need to repeal and replace Dodd-Frank . We need to make America fair again for all businesses , but especially those being run by small business owners.
WALLACE : Senator Rubio , thank you . [ applause ] 
BAIER : Gentlemen , another question for a few of you. Yesterday, just yesterday , President Obama criticized Republican lawmakers trying to block the Iran deal , calling them knee-jerk partisans , adding that hardliners in Iran who chant `` death to America '' were , quote , `` making common cause with the Republican caucus . '' Here's what two of your opponents on the 5 p.m. debate stage said about Iran . [ video clip begins ] 
PERRY : I will tell you one thing : I would whole lot rather had Carly Fiorina over there doing our negotiation than John Kerry . Maybe we would've gotten a deal where we didn't give everything away . But the issue for us is to have a Congress that stands up and says not only no , but hell no , to this money going to a regime that is going to use it for terror ... [ video clip ends ] [ video clip begins ] 
FIORINA : When America does not lead, the world is a dangerous and a tragic place . This is a bad deal . Obama broke every rule of negotiation . Yes , our allies are not perfect , but Iran is at the heart of most of the evil that is going on in the Middle East through their proxy . [ video clip ends ] 
BAIER : Now , I wanna ask a few of you this . First , Governor Walker . You 've said that you would tear up the Iran deal on day one . If this deal is undone , what then ? WALKER : Well , first off , let 's remember . I still remember , as a kid , tying a yellow ribbon around a tree in front of my house during the 444 days that Iran held 52 Americans hostage . Iran is not a place we should be doing business with . To me , you terminate the deal on day one , you reinstate the sanctions authorized by Congress , you go to Congress and put in place even more crippling sanctions in place , and then you convince our allies to do the same . This is not just bad with Iran , this is bad with ISIS . It is tied together , and , once and for all , we need a leader who 's gon na stand up and do something about it . It 's yet another example of the failed foreign policy of the Obama-Clinton doctrine . [ applause ] 
BAIER : Senator Paul, would you tear up the deal on day one ? 
PAUL : I oppose the Iranian deal , and will vote against it . I don't think that the president negotiated from a position of strength , but I don't immediately discount negotiations . I'm a Reagan conservative . Reagan did negotiate with the Soviets . But you have to negotiate from a position of strength , and I think President Obama gave away too much, too early . If there 's going to be a negotiation , you 're going to have to believe somehow that the Iranians are going to comply . And I asked this question to John Kerry , I said `` do you believe they 're trustworthy ? '' and he said `` No . '' And I said , `` well , how are we gonna get them to comply ? '' I would have never released the sanctions before there was consistent evidence of compliance . BAIER : Governor Huckabee, what do you think about what Senator Paul just said ? HUCKABEE : Ronald Reagan said `` trust , but verify . '' President Obama is `` trust , but vilify . '' He trusts our enemies and vilifies everyone who disagrees with him . And the reason we disagree with him has nothing to do with party . [ applause ] [ crosstalk ] HUCKABEE : It has to do with the incredibly dangerous place that this world is gon na be as a result of a deal in which we got nothing . We didn't even get four hostages out . We got nothing , and Iran gets everything they want . We said we would have anywhere , anytime negotiations and inspections , we gave that up . We said that we would make sure that they didn't have any nuclear capacity , we gave that up . The president can't tell us what we got . I 'll tell you what the world got . The world has a burgeoning nuclear power that didn't , as the Soviets , say `` we might defend ourselves in a war . '' What the Iranians have said is , `` we will wipe Israel off the face of the map , and we will bring death to America . '' When someone points a gun at your head [ timer sounds ] and loads it , by God , you ought to take them seriously , and we need to take that seriously . BAIER : Thank you , gentlemen . KELLY : Well , the first debate night of the 2016 presidential campaign continues from Cleveland after a short time-out . Stick around . Social issues , next . [ commercial break ] 
KELLY: Senator Rubio, you favor a rape and incest exception to abortion bans. Cardinal Timothy Dolan of New York just said yesterday those exceptions are preposterous. He said they discriminate against an entire class of human beings. If you believe that life begins at conception, as you say you do, how do you justify ending a life just because it begins violently, through no fault of the baby? 
RUBIO: Well, Megyn, first of all, I'm not sure that that's a correct assessment of my record. I would go on to add that I believe all-- 
KELLY: You don't favor a rape and incest exception? 
RUBIO: I have never said that. And I have never advocated that. What I have advocated is that we pass law in this country that says all human life at every stage of its development is worthy of protection. 
In fact, I think that law already exists. It is called the Constitution of the United States. [applause] 
And let me go further. I believe that every single human being is entitled to the protection of our laws, whether they can vote or not. Whether they can speak or not. Whether they can hire a lawyer or not. Whether they have a birth certificate or not. And I think future generations will look back at this history of our country and call us barbarians for murdering millions of babies who we never gave them a chance to live. [applause] 
KELLY: Mr. Trump, in 1999, you said you were, quote, "very pro- choice." Even supporting partial-birth abortion. You favored an assault weapons ban as well. In 2004, you said in most cases you identified as a Democrat. Even in this campaign, your critics say you often sound more like a Democrat than a Republican, calling several of your opponents on the stage things like clowns and puppets. When did you actually become a Republican? [ catcalls] 
TRUMP: I don't think they like me very much. I'll tell you what. I've evolved on many issues over the years. And you know who else has? Is Ronald Reagan evolved on many issues. 
And I am pro-life. And if you look at the question, I was in business. They asked me a question as to pro-life or choice. And I said if you let it run, that I hate the concept of abortion. I hate the concept of abortion. And then since then, I've very much evolved. 
And what happened is friends of mine years ago were going to have a child, and it was going to be aborted. And it wasn't aborted. And that child today is a total superstar, a great, great child. And I saw that. And I saw other instances. 
And I am very, very proud to say that I am pro-life. 
As far as being a Republican is concerned, I come from a place, New York City, which is virtually, I mean, it is almost exclusively Democrat. And I have really started to see some of the negatives -- as an example, and I have a lot of liking for this man, but the last number of months of his brother's administration were a catastrophe. And unfortunately, those few months gave us President Obama. And you can't be happy about that. [applause] 
KELLY: Governor Bush, I want to ask you, on the subject of name calling of your fellow candidates, a story appeared today quoting an anonymous GOP donor who said you called Mr. Trump a clown, a buffoon, something else that cannot be repeated on television. 
BUSH: None of which is true. 
KELLY: Is it true? 
BUSH: No. It's not true. But I have said that Mr. Trump's language is divisive. 
I want to win. I want one of these people here or the ones at 5:00, to be the next president of the United States. 
We're not going on win by doing what Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton do each and every day. Dividing the country. Saying, creating a grievance kind of environment. We're going to win when we unite people with a hopeful, optimistic message. I have that message because I was a governor of a state that saw people lifted up, because we had high sustained economic growth. Our economy grew at double the rate of the nation. We created 1.3 million jobs. We led the nation seven out of those eight years. We were only one of two states that went to AAA bond rating. I cut taxes, $19 billion. If you do that and apply conservative principles the right way, you create an environment where everybody rises up. That's how we're going to win. Campaigning in places to give people hope that their life is better because too many people are suffering today in America. 
KELLY : Mr. Trump , 30 seconds . 

TRUMP : First of all , Jeb , I am very happy that you denied that , and I appreciate that very much . He is a true gentleman . He really is . One thing he did say , and I mean that . The one thing he did say about me , however , was my tone . And I also understand that . But when you have people that are cutting Christians' heads off , when you have a world that the border and at so many places , that it is medieval times , we've never -- it almost has to be as bad as it ever was in terms of the violence and the horror , we don't have time for tone . [ timer sounds ] We have to go out and get the job done . [ applause ] 

KELLY : The subject of gay marriage and religious liberty . Governor Kasich , if you had a son or daughter who was gay or lesbian , how would you explain to them your opposition to same-sex marriage ? 

KASICH : Well , look , I 'm an old-fashioned person here , and I happen to believe in traditional marriage . But I've also said the court has ruled -- 

KELLY : How would you -- how would you explain it to a child ? 

KASICH : Wait , Megyn , the court has ruled , and I said we 'll accept it . And guess what , I just went to a wedding of a friend of mine who happens to be gay . Because somebody doesn't think the way I do, doesn't mean that I can't care about them or can't love them . So if one of my daughters happened to be that, of course I would love them and I would accept them . Because you know what ? [ applause ] That's what we're taught when we have strong faith . [ applause ] So the issues like that , issues like that are planted to divide us . I think the simple fact of the matter is, and this is where I would agree with Jeb, and I 've been saying it all along , we need to give everybody a chance , treat everybody with respect , and let them share in this great American dream that we have , Megan . So , look , I'm going to love my daughters , I'm going to love them no matter what they do . Because , you know what , [ timer sounds ] God gives me unconditional love . I'm going to give it to my family and my friends and the people around me . 

KELLY : Senator Paul , in the wake of the Supreme Court 's ruling on same sex marriage , Carol Fox on Facebook want to know the following . Quote : what will you do to ensure Christians are not prosecuted for speaking out against gay marriage and will Christians be forced to conduct business that conflicts with their religious beliefs ? 

PAUL : Look , I don't want my marriage or my guns registered in Washington . And if people have an opinion, it 's a religious opinion that is heartly felt, obviously they should be allowed to practice that and no government should interfere with them . One of the things , one of the things that really got to me was the thing in Houston where you had the government , the mayor actually , trying to get the sermons of ministers . When the government tries to invade the church to enforce its own opinion on marriage , that 's when it 's time to resist . 

KELLY : Governor Walker , many in the Black Lives Matter movement , and beyond , believe that overly-aggressive police officers targeting young African Americans is the civil rights issue of our time . Do you agree ? And if so, how do you plan to address it ? And if not, why not ? 

WALKER : Well , I think the most important thing we can do when it comes to policing -- it 's something you 've had a guest on who 's a friend of mine Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clark , who 's talked to me about this many times in the past -- it 's about training . It's about making sure that law enforcement professionals , not only in the way in to their positions but all the way through their time , have the proper training , particularly when it comes to the use of force . And that we protect and stand up and support those men and women who are doing their jobs in law enforcement . And for the very few that don't , that there are consequences to show that we treat everyone the same here in America . 

KELLY : Thank you . 

MODERATOR : Coming up more of our debate , including questions about President Obama 's foreign policy and these guys and their better ideas . Coming up . [ commercial break ] 
BAIER : Welcome back to Cleveland . Our next topic is foreign policy . Candidates, you may not have seen the late developing news today our Fox Pentagon team broke earlier this evening about a top Iranian general traveling to Moscow to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin . His name is General Qassem Soleimani , he's blamed for hundreds of U.S. troop's deaths in Iraq, and Afghanistan . His trip to Russia appears to directly violate U.N. Security Council resolutions to confine him to Iran . So , Mr. Trump, if you were president, how would you respond to this ? 

TRUMP : I would be so different from what you have right now . Like, the polar opposite . We have a president who doesn't have a clue . I would say he's incompetent, but I don't want to do that because that's not nice . [ laughter ] But if you look at the deals we make, whether it 's the nuclear deal with 24 hour periods -- and by the way , before you get to the 24 hours , you have to go through a system . You look at Sgt. Bergdahl, we get Bergdahl, a traitor, and they get five of the big, great killers leaders that they want . We have people in Washington that don't know what they're doing . Now ... [ applause ; scream from audience ] I agree . [ applause ] Now, with Iran , we're making a deal, you would say, we want him . We want out our prisoners . We want all these things , and we don't get anything . We're giving them $ 150 billion dollars plus , they are going to be -- I 'll tell you what , if Iran was a stock, you folks should go out and buy it right now because you'll quadruple -- this, what's happening [ timer sounds ] in Iran , is a disgrace , and it's going to lead to destruction in large portions of the world . [ applause ] 

BAIER : Another new development today , Senior Defense officials tell Fox they strongly suspect Russia was behind the cyber attack on the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs office ... 

UNIDENTIFIED MALE : ... Please . 

BAIER : ... email . This comes in the wake of the Director of National Intelligence blaming the Chinese for the largest ever cyber attack , stealing personal data of tens of millions of Americans . Senator Cruz, in your view, have Russia and China committed acts of cyber war, and if you were president, what would you do about it ? 

CRUZ : Well , Bret , of course they have , and over the last six and a half years we've seen the consequences of the Obama-Clinton foreign policy . Leading from behind is a disaster . We have abandoned and alienated our friends and allies , and our enemies are stronger . Radical Islam is on the rise , Iran's on the verge of acquiring a nuclear weapon , China is waging cyber warfare against America , Russia -- General Soleimani , you just mentioned , the Iranian general is the head of the al Quds forces . He's directly responsible for the murder of over 500 American servicemen in Iraq , and part of this Iranian deal was lifting the international sanctions on General Soleimani . The day General Soleimani flew back from Moscow to Iran was the day we believed that Russia used cyber warfare against the Joint Chiefs . We need a new commander in chief that will stand up to our enemies , and that will have credibility ... [ applause ] It is worth emphasizing that Iran released our hostages in 1981 the day Ronald Reagan was sworn into office . [ applause ]
BAIER: Dr. Carson, in August of 2012 President Obama famously declared Syrian President Bashar al-Assad used chemical weapons, "that's a redline for us," and that there would be enormous consequences. 
One year later, with overwhelming evidence the Assad had, in fact, used chemical weapons and crossed that red line, President Obama declined to use military force against the Assad regime. 
As president, would you have used military force there? 

CARSON: Well, what we have to stop and think about is that we have weakened ourselves militarily to such an extent that if affects all of our military policies. Our Navy is at its smallest size since 1917; our Air Force, since 1940. In recent testimony, the commandant of the Marine Corps said half of the non-deployed units were not ready and you know, the sequester is cutting the heart out of our personnel. Our generals are retiring because they don't want to be part of this, and at the same time, our enemies are increasing. 
Our -- our friends can't trust us anymore. You know, Ukraine was a nuclear-armed state. They gave away their nuclear arms with the understanding that we would protect them. We won't even give them offensive weapons. 
You know, we turned our back on Israel, our ally. You know, in a situation like that, of course Obama's not going to be able to do anything. I would shore up our military first, because if you don't get the military right, nothing else is going to work. [applause] 

BAIER: Governor Walker, as president, what would you do if Russian President Vladimir Putin started a campaign to destabilize NATO allies Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, mirroring the actions Putin took at the early days of Ukraine? 

WALKER: Well first off, for the cyber attack with Russia the other day, it's sad to think right now, but probably the Russian and Chinese government know more about Hillary Clinton's e-mail server than do the members of the United States Congress. [laughter and applause] 
And -- and that has put our national security at risk. If I am president, he won't think about that. You know, Putin believes in the old Lenin adage: you probe with bayonets. When you find mush, you push. When you find steel, you stop. 
Under Obama and Clinton, we found a lot of mush over the last two years. We need to have a national security that puts steel in front of our enemies. I would send weapons to Ukraine. I would work with NATO to put forces on the eastern border of Poland and the Baltic nations, and I would reinstate, put in place back in the missile defense system that we had in Poland and in the Czech Republic. [applause] 
We find steel. 

BAIER: Governor -- Governor Huckabee, the culture of the American military is definitely changing. Women are moving into combat roles. Don't Ask, Don't Tell has obviously been dropped. And now Defense Secretary Ashton Carter recently directed the military to prepare for a moment when it is welcoming transgender persons to serve openly. 
As commander in chief, how would you handle that? 

HUCKABEE: The military is not a social experiment. The purpose of the military is kill people and break things. [applause] 
It's not to transform the culture by trying out some ideas that some people think would make us a different country and more diverse. The purpose is to protect America. I'm not sure how paying for transgender surgery for soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines makes our country safer. 
We've reduced the military by 25 percent... [applause] ... under President Obama. The disaster is that we've forgotten why we have a military. The purpose of it is to make sure that we protect every American, wherever that American is, and if an American is calling out for help, whether it's in Benghazi or at the border, then we ought to be able to answer it. 
We've not done that because we've decimated our military. We're flying B-52s. The most recent one that was put in service was November of 1962. A lot of the B-52s we're flying, we've only got 44 that are in service combat ready, and the fact is, most of them are older than me. And that's pretty scary. 
[laughter and applause]
BAIER: Senator Paul, the first budget you proposed as senator cut all financial aid to Israel. You have since changed your view on that issue. What made you change your mind. 
PAUL: Well, let's be clear, I'm the only one on the stage who actually has a five-year budget that balances. I've put pencil to paper... 
UNKNOWN: I do. 
PAUL: ... and I've said -- and I've said I would cut spending, and I've said exactly where. Each one of my budgets has taken a meat axe to foreign aid, because I think we ought to quit sending it to countries that hate us. [applause] 
I think we ought to quit sending it to countries that burn our flag. Israel is not one of those. But even Benjamin Netanyahu said that ultimately, they will be stronger when they're independent. My position is exactly the same. 
We shouldn't borrow money from China to send it anywhere, but why don't we start with eliminating aid to our enemies. 
BAIER: OK. But you still say that Israel could be one of the countries that is cut from financial aid? 
PAUL: I still say exactly what my original opinion is. Do you borrow money from China to send it to anyone? Out of your surplus, you can help your allies, and Israel is a great ally. And this is no particular animus of Israel, but what I will say, and I will say over and over again, we cannot give away money we don't have. 
We do not project power from bankruptcy court. We're borrowing a million dollars a minute. [applause] 
It's got to stop somewhere. 
BAIER: Governor Christie, what do you think of that answer? 
CHRISTIE: Well, listen. 
You know, if we want to deal with these issues, we have to deal with them in a way that makes sense. 
I agree with what Dr. Carson said earlier. The first thing we need to do to make America stronger is to strengthen our military, and I put out a really specific plan: no less than 500,000 active duty soldiers in the Army. No less than 185,000 active duty marines in the Marine Corps. Bring us to a 350 ship Navy again, and modernize the Ohio class of submarines, and bring our Air Force back to 2,600 aircraft that are ready to go. 
Those are the kind of things that are going to send a clear message around the world. Those are the things that we need to start working on immediately to make our country stronger and make it better. Those are the things that we need to be able to be doing. And as we move towards dealing with foreign aid, I don't disagree with Senator Paul's position that we shouldn't be funding our enemies. But I absolutely believe that Israel is a priority to be able to fund and keep them strong and safe after eight years of this administration. [applause] 
BAIER: Governor, thank you. 
CRUZ: Brett, can I -- Brett, can I jump in on this one? 
BAIER: Senator, we're going to finish up with some more questions, thank you. 
KELLY: We have to stand you by, because after the break, we're going to let the candidates make their closing statements, their final thoughts, and . . . God. 
Stay tuned for that. 
[commercial break] 
KELLY: Welcome back. 
In our final moments here together, we're going to allow the candidates to offer their final thoughts. But first, we want to ask them an interesting closing question from Chase Norton on Facebook, who wants to know this of the candidates: "I want to know if any of them have received a word from God on what they should do and take care of first." 
Senator Cruz, start from you. Any word from God? 
CRUZ: Well, I am blessed to receive a word from God every day in receiving the scriptures and reading the scriptures. And God speaks through the Bible. [applause] 
I'm the son of a pastor and evangelist and I've described many times how my father, when I was a child, was an alcoholic. He wasn't a Christian. And my father left my mother and left me when I was just three years old. 
And someone invited him to Clay Road Baptist Church. And he gave his heart to Jesus and it turned him around. And he got on a plane and he flew back to my mother and me. [applause] 
I would also note that the scripture tells us, "you shall know them by their fruit." We see lots of "campaign conservatives." But if we're going to win in 2016, we need a consistent conservative, someone who has been a fiscal conservative, a social conservative, a national security conservative. 
There are real differences among the candidates on issues like amnesty, like Obamacare, like religious liberty, like life and marriage. And I have been proud to fight and stand for religious liberty, to stand against Planned Parenthood, to defend life for my entire career. 
And I will be proud to continue to do so as president of the United States. 
[cheering and applause] 
KELLY: Governor Kasich, same question. 
KASICH: Well, Megyn, my father was a mailman. His father was a coal miner. My mother's mother could barely speak English. And their son today stands on this podium in the great state of Ohio not only as the governor, but a candidate for president of the United States. [cheering and applause] 
I do believe in miracles. You know, I've had a lot of elections. But my elections are really not about campaigns. I tell my people that these are about a movement. And a movement to do what? To restore common sense. A movement to do things like provide economic growth. And a movement not to let anybody be behind. 
You know, today the country is divided. You asked a question about the police and the difficulty in communities. We've got to unite our country again, because we're stronger when we are united and we are weaker when we are divided. 
And we've got to listen to other people's voices, respect them, but keep in mind, and I believe in terms of the things that I've read in my lifetime, the Lord'is not picking us. But because of how we respect human rights, because that we are a good force in the world, he wants America to be strong. 
He wants America to succeed. And he wants America to lead. And nothing is more important to me than my family, my faith, and my friends. [cheering and applause] 
KELLY: Governor Walker, same question. 
WALKER: Well, thanks, Megyn. 
I'm certainly an imperfect man. And it's only by the blood of Jesus Christ that I've been redeemed from my sins. So I know that God doesn't call me to do a specific thing, God hasn't given me a list, a Ten Commandments, if you will, of things to act on the first day. 
What God calls us to do is follow his will. And ultimately that's what I'm going to try to do. And I hope people've seen it in my state, even in the big challenges I took on when I had over 100,000 protesters in and around our capital, trying to do what I thought was the right thing. 
It wasn't just how I took on those political battles. It was ultimately how I acted. Not responding in kind. Not lashing out. But just being decent going forward and living my life in a way that would be a testimony to him and our faith. [applause] 
KELLY: Senator Rubio, I want to ask you the same question. But I do want to mention, a woman just came here to the stage and asked, what about the veterans? I want to hear more about what these candidates are going to do for our nation's veterans. 
So I put the question to you about God and the veterans, which you may find to be related. 
RUBIO: Well, first, let me say I think God has blessed us. He has blessed the Republican Party with some very good candidates. The Democrats can't even find one. [laughter] [cheering and applause] 
And I believe God has blessed our country. This country has been extraordinarily blessed. And we have honored that blessing. And that's why God has continued to bless us. 
And he has blessed us with young men and women willing to risk their lives and sometimes die in uniform for the safety and security of our people. 
Unfortunately today we have a VA that does not do enough for them. I am proud that last year we helped change the law. We changed the law to give the power to the VA secretary the ability to fire any executive that isn't doing their job. 
And it is outrageous they've only fired one person to date. When I'm president of the United States, we're going to have a VA that cares more about our veterans than about the bureaucrats who work at the VA. [cheering and applause] 
KELLY: Dr. Carson, a question to you about God and his role, but also, one of the issues that the public was very interested in, and we touched on it earlier, is race relations in this country, and how divided we seem right now. And what, if anything, you can do -- you would do as the next president to help heal that divide. 

CARSON: Well, I think the bully pulpit is a wonderful place to start healing that divide. You know, we have the purveyors of hatred who take every single incident between people of two races and try to make a race war out of it, and drive wedges into people. And this does not need to be done. 
What we need to think about instead -- you know, I was asked by an NPR reporter once, why don't I talk about race that often. I said it's because I'm a neurosurgeon. And she thought that was a strange response. And you say -- I said, you see, when I take someone to the operating room, I'm actually operating on the thing that makes them who they are. The skin doesn't make them who they are. The hair doesn't make them who they are. And it's time for us to move beyond that. [applause] 
Because...[applause]...our strength as a nation comes in our unity. We are the United States of America, not the divided states. And those who want to destroy us are trying to divide us, and we shouldn't let them do it. [applause] 

BAIER: Now each candidate will make a closing statement. You'll all have 30 seconds to make a closing statement for this debate. We'll start with Ohio Governor John Kasich. 

KASICH: You know, tonight we hear about what people want to do. I want to tell you what I've done. I was a member of the Armed Services Committee for 18 years. I spent a big chunk of my life studying national security issues and our role in the world. 
No. 2. I was the chairman of the House Budget Committee and one of the chief architects the last time we balanced a budget, and it was the first time we had done it since man walked on the moon. We had a $5 trillion surplus and we cut taxes. 
I spent ten years in the private sector, actually learning how business works. And now I'm the governor of Ohio, and I inherited a state that was on the brink [timer sounds] of dying. And we turned it all around with jobs and balanced budgets and rising credit and tax cuts, and the state is unified, and people have hope again in Ohio. [applause]KELLY: Governor Christie? 

CHRISTIE: Well, thank you, Megyn. Listen, I was born into a middle class family in New Jersey. My dad came home from serving in the Army after having lost his father, worked in the Breyers ice cream plant in Newark, New Jersey. Was the first person to graduate from college. He put himself through college at night. My mom was a secretary. 
I was appointed United States attorney on September 10, 2001. And I spent the next seven years of my career fighting terrorism and putting terrorists in jail. 
I'm a conservative, pro-life governor in a state where it is really tough to be both. A state like New Jersey, with lots of Democrats, but still we cut taxes, we balanced budgets. We fought [timer sounds] the teacher's union. 
This president has had weak leadership, which has led to bad choices. We have got to stop worrying about being loved and start worrying about being respected. And that's exactly how I'll lead our country. [applause]
WALLACE: Senator Paul, closing statement. 

PAUL: I'm a different kind of Republican. I've introduced a five-year balanced budget. I've introduced the largest tax cut in our history. I stood for ten and a half hours on the Senate floor to defend your right to be left alone. [applause] 
But I've also gone to Chicago. I've gone to Detroit. I've been to Ferguson, I've been to Baltimore, because I want our party to be bigger, better and bolder, and I'm the only one that leads Hillary Clinton in five states that were won by President Obama. I'm a different kind of Republican. [applause] 
BAIER: Senator Marco Rubio. 

RUBIO: Thank you. You know, both of my parents were born into poor families on the island of Cuba. They came to America because it was the only place where people like them could have a chance. Here in this country, they never made it big, but the very purpose of their life was to give us the chance to do all the things they never could. 
My father was a bartender. And the journey from the back of that bar to this stage tonight, to me, that is the essence of the American dream. It is what makes our nation different. And I'm running for president because I want that to still be possible for the people trying to do that now. I run for president because I believe that we can't just save the American dream; we can expand it to reach more people and change more lives than ever before. And that's why I'm asking for your vote. So we can make America greater than it has ever been. And make of this century a new American century. [applause] 
BAIER: Thank you, Senator. 
KELLY: Senator Ted Cruz. 
CRUZ: If I'm elected president, let me tell you about my first day in office. The first thing I intend to do is to rescind every illegal and unconstitutional executive action taken by Barack Obama. [applause] 
The next thing I intend to do is instruct the Department of Justice to open an investigation into these videos and to prosecute Planned Parenthood for any criminal violations. [applause] 
The next thing I intend to do is instruct the Department of Justice and the IRS to start (sic) persecuting religious liberty, and then intend to cancel the Iran deal, and finally move the U.S. embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. [applause] 
I will keep my word. My father fled Cuba, and I will fight to defend liberty because my family knows what it's like to lose it. 
WALLACE: Dr. Carson, closing statement. 

CARSON: Well, I haven't said anything about me being the only one to do anything, so let me try that. 
I'm the only one to separate Siamese twins...[laughter] 
The -- the only one to operate on babies while they were still in mother's womb, the only one to take out half of a brain, although you would think, if you go to Washington, that someone had beat me to it. [laughter] 
But I -- but I'm very hopeful that I'm not the only one who's willing to pick up the baton of freedom, because freedom is not free, and we must fight for it every day. Every one of us must fight for it, because we're fighting for our children and the next generation. [applause] 

BAIER: Governor Mike Huckabee, closing statement. 

HUCKABEE: It seems like this election has been a whole lot about a person who's very high in the polls, that doesn't have a clue about how to govern. 
A person who has been filled with scandals, and who could not lead, and, of course, I'm talking about Hillary Clinton. [laughter] 
I think America...

UNKNOWN: Thank you. 

HUCKABEE: ...is in trouble, but it's not beyond repair. But it's going to take leadership who sees the greatness of this country, and who believes that once again we can be one nation, under God. 
I'll be my best to do that, and thank you for your support. [applause] 

KELLY: Governor Scott Walker. 

WALKER: Thanks. 
I'm guy with a wife and two kids, and Harley. One article called me "aggressively normal." 
I ran for governor because I was worried about my kids' future. Then, I took on the big government union bosses, and we won. They tried to recall me, and we won. They target us again, and we won. 
We balanced the budget, cut taxes, and turned our state around with big, bold reforms. 
It wasn't too late for Wisconsin, and it's not too late for America. That's why I ask for your vote. 

WALLACE: Governor Bush, closing statement, sir. 
BUSH: Here's what I believe. I believe we're at the verge of the greatest time to be alive in this world. 
But Washington is holding us back. How we tax, how we regulate. We're not embracing the energy revolution in our midst, a broken immigration system that has been politicized rather than turning it into an economic driver. 
We're not protecting and preserving our entitlement system or reforming for the next generation. All these things languish while we have politicians in Washington using these as wedge issues. 
Here's my commitment to you, because I did it as Florida. We can fix these things. We can grow economically and restore America's leadership in the world, so that everybody has a chance to rise up. I humbly ask for your vote, whenever you're gonna get to vote, whenever the primary is. Thank you all very much. 

BAIER: Mr. Trump, closing statement, sir. 

TRUMP: Our country is in serious trouble. We don't win anymore. 
We don't beat China in trade. We don't beat Japan, with their millions and millions of cars coming into this country, in trade. We can't beat Mexico, at the border or in trade. 
We can't do anything right. Our military has to be strengthened. Our vets have to be taken care of. We have to end Obamacare, and we have to make our country great again, and I will do that. 
Thank you. 
BAIER: Gentlemen, thank you. 

KELLY: It's over! 

BAIER: That's it. 

KELLY: Are you relieved? You were nervous before, they -- they don't look relieved. They look "get me outta here." 
Thank you all very much, and that will do it for the first Republican primary debate night of the 2016 presidential race. Our thanks to the candidates, who will now be joined by their families on stage.
HOLT : Good luck to you . [ applause ] Well , I do n't expect us to cover all the issues of this campaign tonight , but I remind everyone , there are two more presidential debates scheduled . We are going to focus on many of the issues that voters tell us are most important , and we 're going to press for specifics . I am honored to have this role , but this evening belongs to the candidates and , just as important , to the American people.Candidates , we look forward to hearing you articulate your policies and your positions , as well as your visions and your values . So , let 's begin.We 're calling this opening segment `` Achieving Prosperity . '' And central to that is jobs . There are two economic realities in America today . There 's been a record six straight years of job growth , and new census numbers show incomes have increased at a record rate after years of stagnation . However , income inequality remains significant , and nearly half of Americans are living paycheck to paycheck.Beginning with you , Secretary Clinton , why are you a better choice than your opponent to create the kinds of jobs that will put more money into the pockets of American works ? 

CLINTON : Well , thank you , Lester , and thanks to Hofstra for hosting us.The central question in this election is really what kind of country we want to be and what kind of future we 'll build together . Today is my granddaughter 's second birthday , so I think about this a lot . First , we have to build an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top . That means we need new jobs , good jobs , with rising incomes.I want us to invest in you . I want us to invest in your future . That means jobs in infrastructure , in advanced manufacturing , innovation and technology , clean , renewable energy , and small business , because most of the new jobs will come from small business . We also have to make the economy fairer . That starts with raising the national minimum wage and also guarantee , finally , equal pay for women 's work.I also want to see more companies do profit-sharing . If you help create the profits , you should be able to share in them , not just the executives at the top.And I want us to do more to support people who are struggling to balance family and work . I 've heard from so many of you about the difficult choices you face and the stresses that you 're under . So let 's have paid family leave , earned sick days . Let 's be sure we have affordable child care and debt-free college.How are we going to do it ? We 're going to do it by having the wealthy pay their fair share and close the corporate loopholes.Finally , we tonight are on the stage together , Donald Trump and I. Donald , it 's good to be with you . We 're going to have a debate where we are talking about the important issues facing our country . You have to judge us , who can shoulder the immense , awesome responsibilities of the presidency , who can put into action the plans that will make your life better . I hope that I will be able to earn your vote on November 8th.

HOLT : Secretary Clinton , thank you.Mr . Trump , the same question to you . It 's about putting money—more money into the pockets of American workers . You have up to two minutes.

TRUMP : Thank you , Lester . Our jobs are fleeing the country . They 're going to Mexico . They 're going to many other countries . You look at what China is doing to our country in terms of making our product . They 're devaluing their currency , and there 's nobody in our government to fight them . And we have a very good fight . And we have a winning fight . Because they 're using our country as a piggy bank to rebuild China , and many other countries are doing the same thing.So we 're losing our good jobs , so many of them . When you look at what 's happening in Mexico , a friend of mine who builds plants said it 's the eighth wonder of the world . They 're building some of the biggest plants anywhere in the world , some of the most sophisticated , some of the best plants . With the United States , as he said , not so much.So Ford is leaving . You see that , their small car division leaving . Thousands of jobs leaving Michigan , leaving Ohio . They 're all leaving . And we ca n't allow it to happen anymore . As far as child care is concerned and so many other things , I think Hillary and I agree on that . We probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts and what we 're going to do , but perhaps we 'll be talking about that later.But we have to stop our jobs from being stolen from us . We have to stop our companies from leaving the United States and , with it , firing all of their people . All you have to do is take a look at Carrier air conditioning in Indianapolis . They left—fired 1,400 people . They 're going to Mexico . So many hundreds and hundreds of companies are doing this.We can not let it happen . Under my plan , I 'll be reducing taxes tremendously , from 35 percent to 15 percent for companies , small and big businesses . That 's going to be a job creator like we have n't seen since Ronald Reagan . It 's going to be a beautiful thing to watch.Companies will come . They will build . They will expand . New companies will start . And I look very , very much forward to doing it . We have to renegotiate our trade deals , and we have to stop these countries from stealing our companies and our jobs.

HOLT : Secretary Clinton , would you like to respond ? 

CLINTON : Well , I think that trade is an important issue . Of course , we are 5 percent of the world 's population ; we have to trade with the other 95 percent . And we need to have smart , fair trade deals.We also , though , need to have a tax system that rewards work and not just financial transactions . And the kind of plan that Donald has put forth would be trickle-down economics all over again . In fact , it would be the most extreme version , the biggest tax cuts for the top percent of the people in this country than we 've ever had.I call it trumped-up trickle-down , because that 's exactly what it would be . That is not how we grow the economy.We just have a different view about what 's best for growing the economy , how we make investments that will actually produce jobs and rising incomes.I think we come at it from somewhat different perspectives . I understand that . You know , Donald was very fortunate in his life , and that 's all to his benefit . He started his business with $ 14 million , borrowed from his father , and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people , the better off we 'll be and that everything will work out from there.I do n't buy that .

CLINTON: I have a different experience. My father was a small-businessman. He worked really hard. He printed drapery fabrics on long tables, where he pulled out those fabrics and he went down with a silkscreen and dumped the paint in and took the squeegee and kept going.
And so what I believe is the more we can do for the middle class, the more we can invest in you, your education, your skills, your future, the better we will be off and the better we'll grow. That's the kind of economy I want us to see again.



HOLT: Let me follow up with Mr. Trump, if you can. You've talked about creating 25 million jobs, and you've promised to bring back millions of jobs for Americans. How are you going to bring back the industries that have left this country for cheaper labor overseas? How, specifically, are you going to tell American manufacturers that you have to come back?

TRUMP: Well, for one thing—and before we start on that—my father gave me a very small loan in 1975, and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars, with some of the greatest assets in the world, and I say that only because that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
Our country's in deep trouble. We don't know what we're doing when it comes to devaluations and all of these countries all over the world, especially China. They're the best, the best ever at it. What they're doing to us is a very, very sad thing.
So we have to do that. We have to renegotiate our trade deals. And, Lester, they're taking our jobs, they're giving incentives, they're doing things that, frankly, we don't do.
Let me give you the example of Mexico. They have a VAT tax. We're on a different system. When we sell into Mexico, there's a tax. When they sell in—automatic, 16 percent, approximately. When they sell into us, there's no tax. It's a defective agreement. It's been defective for a long time, many years, but the politicians haven't done anything about it.
Now, in all fairness to Secretary Clinton—yes, is that OK? Good. I want you to be very happy. It's very important to me.
But in all fairness to Secretary Clinton, when she started talking about this, it was really very recently. She's been doing this for 30 years. And why hasn't she made the agreements better? The NAFTA agreement is defective. Just because of the tax and many other reasons, but just because of the fact...


HOLT : Let me interrupt just a moment , but ... 
TRUMP : Secretary Clinton and others , politicians , should have been doing this for years , not right now , because of the fact that we 've created a movement . They should have been doing this for years . What 's happened to our jobs and our country and our economy generally is—look , we owe $ 20 trillion . We can not do it any longer , Lester.
HOLT : Back to the question , though . How do you bring back—specifically bring back jobs , American manufacturers ? How do you make them bring the jobs back ? 
TRUMP : Well , the first thing you do is do n't let the jobs leave . The companies are leaving . I could name , I mean , there are thousands of them . They 're leaving , and they 're leaving in bigger numbers than ever.And what you do is you say , fine , you want to go to Mexico or some other country , good luck . We wish you a lot of luck . But if you think you 're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or your cookies or whatever you make and bring them into our country without a tax , you 're wrong.And once you say you 're going to have to tax them coming in , and our politicians never do this , because they have special interests and the special interests want those companies to leave , because in many cases , they own the companies . So what I 'm saying is , we can stop them from leaving . We have to stop them from leaving . And that 's a big , big factor.
HOLT : Let me let Secretary Clinton get in here.
CLINTON : Well , let 's stop for a second and remember where we were eight years ago . We had the worst financial crisis , the Great Recession , the worst since the 1930s . That was in large part because of tax policies that slashed taxes on the wealthy , failed to invest in the middle class , took their eyes off of Wall Street , and created a perfect storm.In fact , Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis . He said , back in 2006 , `` Gee , I hope it does collapse , because then I can go in and buy some and make some money . '' Well , it did collapse.
TRUMP : That 's called business , by the way.
CLINTON : Nine million people—nine million people lost their jobs . Five million people lost their homes . And $ 13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.Now , we have come back from that abyss . And it has not been easy . So we 're now on the precipice of having a potentially much better economy , but the last thing we need to do is to go back to the policies that failed us in the first place.Independent experts have looked at what I 've proposed and looked at what Donald 's proposed , and basically they 've said this , that if his tax plan , which would blow up the debt by over $ 5 trillion and would in some instances disadvantage middle-class families compared to the wealthy , were to go into effect , we would lose 3.5 million jobs and maybe have another recession.They 've looked at my plans and they 've said , OK , if we can do this , and I intend to get it done , we will have 10 million more new jobs , because we will be making investments where we can grow the economy . Take clean energy . Some country is going to be the clean- energy superpower of the 21st century . Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese . I think it 's real.
TRUMP : I did not . I did not . I do not say that.
CLINTON : I think science is real.
TRUMP : I do not say that.
CLINTON : And I think it 's important that we grip this and deal with it , both at home and abroad . And here 's what we can do . We can deploy a half a billion more solar panels . We can have enough clean energy to power every home . We can build a new modern electric grid . That 's a lot of jobs ; that 's a lot of new economic activity.So I 've tried to be very specific about what we can and should do , and I am determined that we 're going to get the economy really moving again , building on the progress we 've made over the last eight years , but never going back to what got us in trouble in the first place.

HOLT : Mr. Trump ? 

TRUMP : She talks about solar panels . We invested in a solar company , our country . That was a disaster . They lost plenty of money on that one.Now , look , I 'm a great believer in all forms of energy , but we 're putting a lot of people out of work . Our energy policies are a disaster . Our country is losing so much in terms of energy , in terms of paying off our debt . You ca n't do what you 're looking to do with $ 20 trillion in debt.The Obama administration , from the time they 've come in , is over 230 years ' worth of debt , and he 's topped it . He 's doubled it in a course of almost eight years , seven-and-a-half years , to be semi- exact.So I will tell you this . We have to do a much better job at keeping our jobs . And we have to do a much better job at giving companies incentives to build new companies or to expand , because they 're not doing it.And all you have to do is look at Michigan and look at Ohio and look at all of these places where so many of their jobs and their companies are just leaving , they 're gone.And , Hillary , I 'd just ask you this . You 've been doing this for 30 years . Why are you just thinking about these solutions right now ? For 30 years , you 've been doing it , and now you 're just starting to think of solutions.
CLINTON : Well , actually ... 
TRUMP : I will bring—excuse me . I will bring back jobs . You ca n't bring back jobs.

CLINTON : Well , actually , I have thought about this quite a bit.
TRUMP : Yeah , for 30 years.

CLINTON : And I have—well , not quite that long . I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s . I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again ... 
TRUMP : Well , he approved NAFTA ... [ crosstalk ] 

CLINTON : ... million new jobs , a balanced budget ... 

TRUMP : He approved NAFTA , which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country.

CLINTON : Incomes went up for everybody . Manufacturing jobs went up also in the 1990s , if we 're actually going to look at the facts.When I was in the Senate , I had a number of trade deals that came before me , and I held them all to the same test . Will they create jobs in America ? Will they raise incomes in America ? And are they good for our national security ?


CLINTON: Some of them I voted for. The biggest one, a multinational one known as CAFTA, I voted against. And because I hold the same standards as I look at all of these trade deals.
But let's not assume that trade is the only challenge we have in the economy. I think it is a part of it, and I've said what I'm going to do. I'm going to have a special prosecutor. We're going to enforce the trade deals we have, and we're going to hold people accountable.
When I was secretary of state, we actually increased American exports globally 30 percent. We increased them to China 50 percent. So I know how to really work to get new jobs and to get exports that helped to create more new jobs.
HOLT: Very quickly...
TRUMP: But you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or any number you want to...
CLINTON: Well, I've been a senator, Donald...
TRUMP: You haven't done it. You haven't done it.
CLINTON: And I have been a secretary of state...
TRUMP: Excuse me.
CLINTON: And I have done a lot...
TRUMP: Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.
CLINTON: Well, that's your opinion. That is your opinion.
TRUMP: You go to New England, you go to Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, Secretary Clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacture is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent. NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere, but certainly ever signed in this country.
And now you want to approve Trans-Pacific Partnership. You were totally in favor of it. Then you heard what I was saying, how bad it is, and you said, I can't win that debate. But you know that if you did win, you would approve that, and that will be almost as bad as NAFTA. Nothing will ever top NAFTA.
CLINTON: Well, that is just not accurate. I was against it once it was finally negotiated and the terms were laid out. I wrote about that in...
TRUMP: You called it the gold standard.
[crosstalk]
TRUMP: You called it the gold standard of trade deals. You said it's the finest deal you've ever seen.
CLINTON: No.
TRUMP: And then you heard what I said about it, and all of a sudden you were against it.
CLINTON: Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts. The facts are—I did say I hoped it would be a good deal, but when it was negotiated...
TRUMP: Not.
CLINTON: ... which I was not responsible for, I concluded it wasn't. I wrote about that in my book...
TRUMP: So is it President Obama's fault?
CLINTON: ... before you even announced.
TRUMP: Is it President Obama's fault?
CLINTON: Look, there are differences...
TRUMP: Secretary, is it President Obama's fault?
CLINTON: There are...
TRUMP: Because he's pushing it.
CLINTON: There are different views about what's good for our country, our economy, and our leadership in the world. And I think it's important to look at what we need to do to get the economy going again. That's why I said new jobs with rising incomes, investments, not in more tax cuts that would add $5 trillion to the debt.
TRUMP: But you have no plan.
CLINTON: But in—oh, but I do.
TRUMP: Secretary, you have no plan.
CLINTON: In fact, I have written a book about it. It's called "Stronger Together." You can pick it up tomorrow at a bookstore...
TRUMP: That's about all you've...
[crosstalk]

HOLT : Folks , we 're going to ... 

CLINTON : ... or at an airport near you.

HOLT : We 're going to move to ... 

CLINTON : But it 's because I see this—we need to have strong growth , fair growth , sustained growth . We also have to look at how we help families balance the responsibilities at home and the responsibilities at business.So we have a very robust set of plans . And people have looked at both of our plans , have concluded that mine would create 10 million jobs and yours would lose us 3.5 million jobs , and explode the debt which would have a recession.

TRUMP : You are going to approve one of the biggest tax cuts in history . You are going to approve one of the biggest tax increases in history . You are going to drive business out . Your regulations are a disaster , and you 're going to increase regulations all over the place.And by the way , my tax cut is the biggest since Ronald Reagan . I 'm very proud of it . It will create tremendous numbers of new jobs . But regulations , you are going to regulate these businesses out of existence.When I go around—Lester , I tell you this , I 've been all over . And when I go around , despite the tax cut , the thing—the things that business as in people like the most is the fact that I 'm cutting regulation . You have regulations on top of regulations , and new companies can not form and old companies are going out of business . And you want to increase the regulations and make them even worse.I 'm going to cut regulations . I 'm going to cut taxes big league , and you 're going to raise taxes big league , end of story.

HOLT : Let me get you to pause right there , because we 're going to move into—we 're going to move into the next segment . We 're going to talk taxes ... 

CLINTON : That can't—that ca n't be left to stand.

HOLT : Please just take 30 seconds and then we 're going to go on.

CLINTON : I kind of assumed that there would be a lot of these charges and claims , and so ... 

TRUMP : Facts.

CLINTON : So we have taken the home page of my website , HillaryClinton.com , and we 've turned it into a fact-checker . So if you want to see in real-time what the facts are , please go and take a look . Because what I have proposed ... 

TRUMP : And take a look at mine , also , and you 'll see.

CLINTON : ... would not add a penny to the debt , and your plans would add $ 5 trillion to the debt . What I have proposed would cut regulations and streamline them for small businesses . What I have proposed would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy , because they have made all the gains in the economy . And I think it 's time that the wealthy and corporations paid their fair share to support this country.

HOLT : Well , you just opened the next segment.

TRUMP : Well , could I just finish—I think I ... [ crosstalk ] 
HOLT : I 'm going to give you a chance right here ... 
TRUMP : I think I should—you go to her website , and you take a look at her website.HOLT : ... with a new 15-minute segment ... TRUMP : She 's going to raise taxes $ 1.3 trillion.HOLT : Mr. Trump , I 'm going to ... TRUMP : And look at her website . You know what ? It 's no difference than this . She 's telling us how to fight ISIS . Just go to her website . She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website . I do n't think General Douglas MacArthur would like that too much.
HOLT : The next segment , we 're continuing ... CLINTON : Well , at least I have a plan to fight ISIS.
HOLT : ... achieving prosperity ... TRUMP : No , no , you 're telling the enemy everything you want to do.CLINTON : No , we 're not . No , we 're not.TRUMP : See , you 're telling the enemy everything you want to do . No wonder you 've been fighting—no wonder you 've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life.
CLINTON : That 's a—that's—go to the—please , fact checkers , get to work.
HOLT : OK , you are unpacking a lot here . And we 're still on the issue of achieving prosperity . And I want to talk about taxes . The fundamental difference between the two of you concerns the wealthy.Secretary Clinton , you 're calling for a tax increase on the wealthiest Americans . I 'd like you to further defend that . And , Mr. Trump , you 're calling for tax cuts for the wealthy . I 'd like you to defend that . And this next two-minute answer goes to you , Mr. Trump.TRUMP : Well , I 'm really calling for major jobs , because the wealthy are going create tremendous jobs . They 're going to expand their companies . They 're going to do a tremendous job.I 'm getting rid of the carried interest provision . And if you really look , it 's not a tax—it 's really not a great thing for the wealthy . It 's a great thing for the middle class . It 's a great thing for companies to expand.And when these people are going to put billions and billions of dollars into companies , and when they 're going to bring $ 2.5 trillion back from overseas , where they ca n't bring the money back , because politicians like Secretary Clinton wo n't allow them to bring the money back , because the taxes are so onerous , and the bureaucratic red tape , so what—is so bad.So what they 're doing is they 're leaving our country , and they 're , believe it or not , leaving because taxes are too high and because some of them have lots of money outside of our country . And instead of bringing it back and putting the money to work , because they ca n't work out a deal to—and everybody agrees it should be brought back.Instead of that , they 're leaving our country to get their money , because they ca n't bring their money back into our country , because of bureaucratic red tape , because they ca n't get together . Because we have—we have a president that ca n't sit them around a table and get them to approve something.And here 's the thing . Republicans and Democrats agree that this should be done , $ 2.5 trillion . I happen to think it 's double that . It 's probably $ 5 trillion that we ca n't bring into our country , Lester . And with a little leadership , you 'd get it in here very quickly , and it could be put to use on the inner cities and lots of other things , and it would be beautiful.But we have no leadership . And honestly , that starts with Secretary Clinton.
HOLT : All right . You have two minutes of the same question to defend tax increases on the wealthiest Americans , Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON : I have a feeling that by , the end of this evening , I 'm going to be blamed for everything that 's ever happened.
TRUMP : Why not ? 
CLINTON : Why not ? Yeah , why not ? [ laughter ] You know , just join the debate by saying more crazy things . Now , let me say this , it is absolutely the case ... 
TRUMP : There 's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into their country.
HOLT : This is—this is Secretary Clinton 's two minutes , please.
TRUMP : Yes.
CLINTON : Yeah , well , let 's start the clock again , Lester . We 've looked at your tax proposals . I do n't see changes in the corporate tax rates or the kinds of proposals you 're referring to that would cause the repatriation , bringing back of money that 's stranded overseas . I happen to support that.
TRUMP : Then you did n't read it.
CLINTON : I happen to—I happen to support that in a way that will actually work to our benefit . But when I look at what you have proposed , you have what is called now the Trump loophole , because it would so advantage you and the business you do . You 've proposed an approach that has a ... 
TRUMP : Who gave it that name ? The first I've—who gave it that name ? [ crosstalk ] HOLT : Mr. Trump , this is Secretary Clinton 's two minutes.

CLINTON : ... $ 4 billion tax benefit for your family . And when you look at what you are proposing ... 

TRUMP : How much ? How much for my family ? 

CLINTON : ... it is ... 

TRUMP : Lester , how much ? 

CLINTON : ... as I said , trumped-up trickle-down . Trickle-down did not work . It got us into the mess we were in , in 2008 and 2009 . Slashing taxes on the wealthy has n't worked.And a lot of really smart , wealthy people know that . And they are saying , hey , we need to do more to make the contributions we should be making to rebuild the middle class.I do n't think top-down works in America . I think building the middle class , investing in the middle class , making college debt-free so more young people can get their education , helping people refinance their—their debt from college at a lower rate . Those are the kinds of things that will really boost the economy . Broad-based , inclusive growth is what we need in America , not more advantages for people at the very top.

HOLT : Mr. Trump , we 're ... 

TRUMP : Typical politician . All talk , no action . Sounds good , does n't work . Never going to happen . Our country is suffering because people like Secretary Clinton have made such bad decisions in terms of our jobs and in terms of what 's going on.Now , look , we have the worst revival of an economy since the Great Depression . And believe me : We 're in a bubble right now . And the only thing that looks good is the stock market , but if you raise interest rates even a little bit , that 's going to come crashing down.We are in a big , fat , ugly bubble . And we better be awfully careful . And we have a Fed that 's doing political things . This Janet Yellen of the Fed . The Fed is doing political—by keeping the interest rates at this level . And believe me : The day Obama goes off , and he leaves , and goes out to the golf course for the rest of his life to play golf , when they raise interest rates , you 're going to see some very bad things happen , because the Fed is not doing their job . The Fed is being more political than Secretary Clinton.

HOLT : Mr. Trump , we 're talking about the burden that Americans have to pay , yet you have not released your tax returns . And the reason nominees have released their returns for decades is so that voters will know if their potential president owes money to—who he owes it to and any business conflicts . Do n't Americans have a right to know if there are any conflicts of interest ? 

TRUMP : I do n't mind releasing—I 'm under a routine audit . And it 'll be released . And—as soon as the audit 's finished , it will be released.But you will learn more about Donald Trump by going down to the federal elections , where I filed a 104-page essentially financial statement of sorts , the forms that they have . It shows income—in fact , the income—I just looked today—the income is filed at $ 694 million for this past year , $ 694 million . If you would have told me I was going to make that 15 or 20 years ago , I would have been very surprised.But that 's the kind of thinking that our country needs . When we have a country that 's doing so badly , that 's being ripped off by every single country in the world , it 's the kind of thinking that our country needs , because everybody—Lester , we have a trade deficit with all of the countries that we do business with , of almost $ 800 billion a year . You know what that is ? That means , who 's negotiating these trade deals ? We have people that are political hacks negotiating our trade deals.

HOLT : The IRS says an audit ... 

TRUMP : Excuse me.

HOLT : ... of your taxes—you 're perfectly free to release your taxes during an audit . And so the question , does the public 's right to know outweigh your personal ... 

TRUMP : Well , I told you , I will release them as soon as the audit . Look , I 've been under audit almost for 15 years . I know a lot of wealthy people that have never been audited . I said , do you get audited ? I get audited almost every year.And in a way , I should be complaining . I 'm not even complaining . I do n't mind it . It 's almost become a way of life . I get audited by the IRS . But other people don't.I will say this . We have a situation in this country that has to be taken care of . I will release my tax returns—against my lawyer 's wishes—when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted . As soon as she releases them , I will release . [ applause ] I will release my tax returns . And that 's against—my lawyers , they say , `` Do n't do it . '' I will tell you this . No—in fact , watching shows , they 're reading the papers . Almost every lawyer says , you do n't release your returns until the audit 's complete . When the audit 's complete , I 'll do it . But I would go against them if she releases her e-mails.

HOLT : So it 's negotiable ? 

TRUMP : It 's not negotiable , no . Let her release the e-mails . Why did she delete 33,000 ... 
HOLT : Well , I 'll let her answer that . But let me just admonish the audience one more time . There was an agreement . We did ask you to be silent , so it would be helpful for us . Secretary Clinton ? 
CLINTON : Well , I think you 've seen another example of bait-and- switch here . For 40 years , everyone running for president has released their tax returns . You can go and see nearly , I think , 39 , 40 years of our tax returns , but everyone has done it . We know the IRS has made clear there is no prohibition on releasing it when you 're under audit.So you 've got to ask yourself , why wo n't he release his tax returns ? And I think there may be a couple of reasons . First , maybe he 's not as rich as he says he is . Second , maybe he 's not as charitable as he claims to be.Third , we do n't know all of his business dealings , but we have been told through investigative reporting that he owes about $ 650 million to Wall Street and foreign banks . Or maybe he does n't want the American people , all of you watching tonight , to know that he 's paid nothing in federal taxes , because the only years that anybody 's ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license , and they showed he did n't pay any federal income tax.
TRUMP : That makes me smart.
CLINTON : So if he 's paid zero , that means zero for troops , zero for vets , zero for schools or health . And I think probably he 's not all that enthusiastic about having the rest of our country see what the real reasons are , because it must be something really important , even terrible , that he 's trying to hide.And the financial disclosure statements , they do n't give you the tax rate . They do n't give you all the details that tax returns would . And it just seems to me that this is something that the American people deserve to see . And I have no reason to believe that he 's ever going to release his tax returns , because there 's something he 's hiding.And we 'll guess . We 'll keep guessing at what it might be that he 's hiding . But I think the question is , were he ever to get near the White House , what would be those conflicts ? Who does he owe money to ? Well , he owes you the answers to that , and he should provide them.
HOLT : He also—he also raised the issue of your e-mails . Do you want to respond to that ? 
CLINTON : I do . You know , I made a mistake using a private e- mail.
TRUMP : That 's for sure.
CLINTON : And if I had to do it over again , I would , obviously , do it differently . But I 'm not going to make any excuses . It was a mistake , and I take responsibility for that.
HOLT : Mr. Trump ? 
TRUMP : That was more than a mistake . That was done purposely . OK ? That was not a mistake . That was done purposely . When you have your staff taking the Fifth Amendment , taking the Fifth so they 're not prosecuted , when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the Fifth , I think it 's disgraceful . And believe me , this country thinks it's—really thinks it 's disgraceful , also.As far as my tax returns , you do n't learn that much from tax returns . That I can tell you . You learn a lot from financial disclosure . And you should go down and take a look at that.The other thing , I 'm extremely underleveraged . The report that said $ 650—which , by the way , a lot of friends of mine that know my business say , boy , that 's really not a lot of money . It 's not a lot of money relative to what I had.The buildings that were in question , they said in the same report , which was—actually , it was n't even a bad story , to be honest with you , but the buildings are worth $ 3.9 billion . And the $ 650 is n't even on that . But it 's not $ 650 . It 's much less than that.But I could give you a list of banks , I would—if that would help you , I would give you a list of banks . These are very fine institutions , very fine banks . I could do that very quickly.I am very underleveraged . I have a great company . I have a tremendous income . And the reason I say that is not in a braggadocios way . It 's because it 's about time that this country had somebody running it that has an idea about money.When we have $ 20 trillion in debt , and our country 's a mess , you know , it 's one thing to have $ 20 trillion in debt and our roads are good and our bridges are good and everything 's in great shape , our airports . Our airports are like from a third world country.You land at LaGuardia , you land at Kennedy , you land at LAX , you land at Newark , and you come in from Dubai and Qatar and you see these incredible—you come in from China , you see these incredible airports , and you land—we 've become a third world country.So the worst of all things has happened . We owe $ 20 trillion , and we 're a mess . We have n't even started . And we 've spent $ 6 trillion in the Middle East , according to a report that I just saw . Whether it 's 6 or 5 , but it looks like it 's 6 , $ 6 trillion in the Middle East , we could have rebuilt our country twice.And it 's really a shame . And it 's politicians like Secretary Clinton that have caused this problem . Our country has tremendous problems . We 're a debtor nation . We 're a serious debtor nation . And we have a country that needs new roads , new tunnels , new bridges , new airports , new schools , new hospitals . And we don't have the money , because it 's been squandered on so many of your ideas.
HOLT : We 'll let you respond and we 'll move on to the next segment.
CLINTON : And maybe because you have n't paid any federal income tax for a lot of years . [ applause ] And the other thing I think is important ... TRUMP : It would be squandered , too , believe me.
CLINTON : ... is if your—if your main claim to be president of the United States is your business , then I think we should talk about that . You know , your campaign manager said that you built a lot of businesses on the backs of little guys.And , indeed , I have met a lot of the people who were stiffed by you and your businesses , Donald . I 've met dishwashers , painters , architects , glass installers , marble installers , drapery installers , like my dad was , who you refused to pay when they finished the work that you asked them to do.CLINTON: We have an architect in the audience who designed one of your clubhouses at one of your golf courses. It's a beautiful facility. It immediately was put to use. And you wouldn't pay what the man needed to be paid, what he was charging you to do...
TRUMP: Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work...

CLINTON: Well, to...
TRUMP: Which our country should do, too.

CLINTON: Do the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the course of your business not deserve some kind of apology from someone who has taken their labor, taken the goods that they produced, and then refused to pay them?
I can only say that I'm certainly relieved that my late father never did business with you. He provided a good middle-class life for us, but the people he worked for, he expected the bargain to be kept on both sides.
And when we talk about your business, you've taken business bankruptcy six times. There are a lot of great businesspeople that have never taken bankruptcy once. You call yourself the King of Debt. You talk about leverage. You even at one time suggested that you would try to negotiate down the national debt of the United States.

TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.

CLINTON: Well, sometimes there's not a direct transfer of skills from business to government, but sometimes what happened in business would be really bad for government.

HOLT: Let's let Mr. Trump...

CLINTON: And we need to be very clear about that.

TRUMP: So, yeah, I think—I do think it's time. Look, it's all words, it's all sound bites. I built an unbelievable company. Some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets anywhere in the world, beyond the United States, in Europe, lots of different places. It's an unbelievable company.
But on occasion, four times, we used certain laws that are there. And when Secretary Clinton talks about people that didn't get paid, first of all, they did get paid a lot, but taken advantage of the laws of the nation.
Now, if you want to change the laws, you've been there a long time, change the laws. But I take advantage of the laws of the nation because I'm running a company. My obligation right now is to do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies. And that's what I do.
But what she doesn't say is that tens of thousands of people that are unbelievably happy and that love me. I'll give you an example. We're just opening up on Pennsylvania Avenue right next to the White House, so if I don't get there one way, I'm going to get to Pennsylvania Avenue another.
But we're opening the Old Post Office. Under budget, ahead of schedule, saved tremendous money. I'm a year ahead of schedule. And that's what this country should be doing.
We build roads and they cost two and three and four times what they're supposed to cost. We buy products for our military and they come in at costs that are so far above what they were supposed to be, because we don't have people that know what they're doing.
When we look at the budget, the budget is bad to a large extent because we have people that have no idea as to what to do and how to buy. The Trump International is way under budget and way ahead of schedule. And we should be able to do that for our country.
HOLT: Well, we're well behind schedule, so I want to move to our next segment. We move into our next segment talking about America's direction. And let's start by talking about race.
The share of Americans who say race relations are bad in this country is the highest it's been in decades, much of it amplified by shootings of African-Americans by police, as we've seen recently in Charlotte and Tulsa. Race has been a big issue in this campaign, and one of you is going to have to bridge a very wide and bitter gap.
So how do you heal the divide? Secretary Clinton, you get two minutes on this.
CLINTON: Well, you're right. Race remains a significant challenge in our country. Unfortunately, race still determines too much, often determines where people live, determines what kind of education in their public schools they can get, and, yes, it determines how they're treated in the criminal justice system. We've just seen those two tragic examples in both Tulsa and Charlotte.
And we've got to do several things at the same time. We have to restore trust between communities and the police. We have to work to make sure that our police are using the best training, the best techniques, that they're well prepared to use force only when necessary. Everyone should be respected by the law, and everyone should respect the law.
Right now, that's not the case in a lot of our neighborhoods. So I have, ever since the first day of my campaign, called for criminal justice reform. I've laid out a platform that I think would begin to remedy some of the problems we have in the criminal justice system.
But we also have to recognize, in addition to the challenges that we face with policing, there are so many good, brave police officers who equally want reform. So we have to bring communities together in order to begin working on that as a mutual goal. And we've got to get guns out of the hands of people who should not have them.
The gun epidemic is the leading cause of death of young African- American men, more than the next nine causes put together. So we have to do two things, as I said. We have to restore trust. We have to work with the police. We have to make sure they respect the communities and the communities respect them. And we have to tackle the plague of gun violence, which is a big contributor to a lot of the problems that we're seeing today.

HOLT: All right, Mr. Trump, you have two minutes. How do you heal the divide?
TRUMP: Well, first of all, Secretary Clinton doesn't want to use a couple of words, and that's law and order. And we need law and order. If we don't have it, we're not going to have a country.
And when I look at what's going on in Charlotte, a city I love, a city where I have investments, when I look at what's going on throughout various parts of our country, whether it's—I mean, I can just keep naming them all day long—we need law and order in our country.
I just got today the, as you know, the endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police, we just—just came in. We have endorsements from, I think, almost every police group, very—I mean, a large percentage of them in the United States.
We have a situation where we have our inner cities, African- Americans, Hispanics are living in hell because it's so dangerous. You walk down the street, you get shot.
In Chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands since January 1st. Thousands of shootings. And I'm saying, where is this? Is this a war-torn country? What are we doing? And we have to stop the violence. We have to bring back law and order. In a place like Chicago, where thousands of people have been killed, thousands over the last number of years, in fact, almost 4,000 have been killed since Barack Obama became president, over—almost 4,000 people in Chicago have been killed. We have to bring back law and order.
Now, whether or not in a place like Chicago you do stop and frisk, which worked very well, Mayor Giuliani is here, worked very well in New York. It brought the crime rate way down. But you take the gun away from criminals that shouldn't be having it.
We have gangs roaming the street. And in many cases, they're illegally here, illegal immigrants. And they have guns. And they shoot people. And we have to be very strong. And we have to be very vigilant.
We have to be—we have to know what we're doing. Right now, our police, in many cases, are afraid to do anything. We have to protect our inner cities, because African-American communities are being decimated by crime, decimated.

HOLT: Your two—your two minutes expired, but I do want to follow up. Stop-and-frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York, because it largely singled out black and Hispanic young men.

TRUMP: No, you're wrong. It went before a judge, who was a very against-police judge. It was taken away from her. And our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case. They would have won an appeal. If you look at it, throughout the country, there are many places where it's allowed.
HOLT: The argument is that it's a form of racial profiling.
TRUMP: No, the argument is that we have to take the guns away from these people that have them and they are bad people that shouldn't have them.
These are felons. These are people that are bad people that shouldn't be—when you have 3,000 shootings in Chicago from January 1st, when you have 4,000 people killed in Chicago by guns, from the beginning of the presidency of Barack Obama, his hometown, you have to have stop-and-frisk.
You need more police. You need a better community, you know, relation. You don't have good community relations in Chicago. It's terrible. I have property there. It's terrible what's going on in Chicago.
But when you look—and Chicago's not the only—you go to Ferguson, you go to so many different places. You need better relationships. I agree with Secretary Clinton on this.
You need better relationships between the communities and the police, because in some cases, it's not good.
But you look at Dallas, where the relationships were really studied, the relationships were really a beautiful thing, and then five police officers were killed one night very violently. So there's some bad things going on. Some really bad things.

HOLT: Secretary Clinton...

TRUMP: But we need—Lester, we need law and order. And we need law and order in the inner cities, because the people that are most affected by what's happening are African-American and Hispanic people. And it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen.

HOLT: Secretary Clinton?

CLINTON: Well, I've heard—I've heard Donald say this at his rallies, and it's really unfortunate that he paints such a dire negative picture of black communities in our country.

TRUMP: Ugh.

CLINTON: You know, the vibrancy of the black church, the black businesses that employ so many people, the opportunities that so many families are working to provide for their kids. There's a lot that we should be proud of and we should be supporting and lifting up.
But we do always have to make sure we keep people safe. There are the right ways of doing it, and then there are ways that are ineffective. Stop-and-frisk was found to be unconstitutional and, in part, because it was ineffective. It did not do what it needed to do.
Now, I believe in community policing. And, in fact, violent crime is one-half of what it was in 1991. Property crime is down 40 percent. We just don't want to see it creep back up. We've had 25 years of very good cooperation.
But there were some problems, some unintended consequences. Too many young African-American and Latino men ended up in jail for nonviolent offenses. And it's just a fact that if you're a young African-American man and you do the same thing as a young white man, you are more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted, and incarcerated. So we've got to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system. We cannot just say law and order. We have to say—we have to come forward with a plan that is going to divert people from the criminal justice system, deal with mandatory minimum sentences, which have put too many people away for too long for doing too little.
We need to have more second chance programs. I'm glad that we're ending private prisons in the federal system; I want to see them ended in the state system. You shouldn't have a profit motivation to fill prison cells with young Americans. So there are some positive ways we can work on this.
And I believe strongly that commonsense gun safety measures would assist us. Right now—and this is something Donald has supported, along with the gun lobby—right now, we've got too many military- style weapons on the streets. In a lot of places, our police are outgunned. We need comprehensive background checks, and we need to keep guns out of the hands of those who will do harm.
And we finally need to pass a prohibition on anyone who's on the terrorist watch list from being able to buy a gun in our country. If you're too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun. So there are things we can do, and we ought to do it in a bipartisan way.

HOLT: Secretary Clinton, last week, you said we've got to do everything possible to improve policing, to go right at implicit bias. Do you believe that police are implicitly biased against black people?
CLINTON: Lester, I think implicit bias is a problem for everyone, not just police. I think, unfortunately, too many of us in our great country jump to conclusions about each other. And therefore, I think we need all of us to be asking hard questions about, you know, why am I feeling this way?
But when it comes to policing, since it can have literally fatal consequences, I have said, in my first budget, we would put money into that budget to help us deal with implicit bias by retraining a lot of our police officers.
I've met with a group of very distinguished, experienced police chiefs a few weeks ago. They admit it's an issue. They've got a lot of concerns. Mental health is one of the biggest concerns, because now police are having to handle a lot of really difficult mental health problems on the street.
They want support, they want more training, they want more assistance. And I think the federal government could be in a position where we would offer and provide that. 
HOLT: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: I'd like to respond to that.
HOLT: Please.
TRUMP: First of all, I agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give certain rights to people on watch lists and no- fly lists. I agree with you. When a person is on a watch list or a no-fly list, and I have the endorsement of the NRA, which I'm very proud of. These are very, very good people, and they're protecting the Second Amendment.
But I think we have to look very strongly at no-fly lists and watch lists. And when people are on there, even if they shouldn't be on there, we'll help them, we'll help them legally, we'll help them get off. But I tend to agree with that quite strongly.
I do want to bring up the fact that you were the one that brought up the words super-predator about young black youth. And that's a term that I think was a—it's—it's been horribly met, as you know. I think you've apologized for it. But I think it was a terrible thing to say.
And when it comes to stop-and-frisk, you know, you're talking about takes guns away. Well, I'm talking about taking guns away from gangs and people that use them. And I don't think—I really don't think you disagree with me on this, if you want to know the truth.
I think maybe there's a political reason why you can't say it, but I really don't believe—in New York City, stop-and-frisk, we had 2,200 murders, and stop-and-frisk brought it down to 500 murders. Five hundred murders is a lot of murders. It's hard to believe, 500 is like supposed to be good?
But we went from 2,200 to 500. And it was continued on by Mayor Bloomberg. And it was terminated by current mayor. But stop-and- frisk had a tremendous impact on the safety of New York City. Tremendous beyond belief. So when you say it has no impact, it really did. It had a very, very big impact.
CLINTON: Well, it's also fair to say, if we're going to talk about mayors, that under the current mayor, crime has continued to drop, including murders. So there is...
TRUMP: No, you're wrong. You're wrong.
CLINTON: No, I'm not.
TRUMP: Murders are up. All right. You check it.
CLINTON: New York—New York has done an excellent job. And I give credit—I give credit across the board going back two mayors, two police chiefs, because it has worked. And other communities need to come together to do what will work, as well.
Look, one murder is too many. But it is important that we learn about what has been effective. And not go to things that sound good that really did not have the kind of impact that we would want. Who disagrees with keeping neighborhoods safe?
But let's also add, no one should disagree about respecting the rights of young men who live in those neighborhoods. And so we need to do a better job of working, again, with the communities, faith communities, business communities, as well as the police to try to deal with this problem.
HOLT: This conversation is about race. And so, Mr. Trump, I have to ask you for five...
TRUMP: I'd like to just respond, if I might.
HOLT: Please—20 seconds.
TRUMP: I'd just like to respond.
HOLT: Please respond, then I've got a quick follow-up for you.
TRUMP: I will. Look, the African-American community has been let down by our politicians. They talk good around election time, like right now, and after the election, they said, see ya later, I'll see you in four years.
The African-American community—because—look, the community within the inner cities has been so badly treated. They've been abused and used in order to get votes by Democrat politicians, because that's what it is. They've controlled these communities for up to 100 years.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, let me...
[crosstalk]
CLINTON: Well, I—I do think...
TRUMP: And I will tell you, you look at the inner cities—and I just left Detroit, and I just left Philadelphia, and I just—you know, you've seen me, I've been all over the place. You decided to stay home, and that's OK. But I will tell you, I've been all over. And I've met some of the greatest people I'll ever meet within these communities. And they are very, very upset with what their politicians have told them and what their politicians have done.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, I...
CLINTON: I think—I think—I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate. And, yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And I think that's a good thing. [applause]
HOLT : Mr. Trump , for five years , you perpetuated a false claim that the nation 's first black president was not a natural-born citizen . You questioned his legitimacy . In the last couple of weeks , you acknowledged what most Americans have accepted for years : The president was born in the United States . Can you tell us what took you so long ? 

TRUMP : I 'll tell you very—well , just very simple to say . Sidney Blumenthal works for the campaign and close—very close friend of Secretary Clinton . And her campaign manager , Patti Doyle , went to—during the campaign , her campaign against President Obama , fought very hard . And you can go look it up , and you can check it out.And if you look at CNN this past week , Patti Solis Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer saying that this happened . Blumenthal sent McClatchy , highly respected reporter at McClatchy , to Kenya to find out about it . They were pressing it very hard . She failed to get the birth certificate.When I got involved , I did n't fail . I got him to give the birth certificate . So I 'm satisfied with it . And I 'll tell you why I 'm satisfied with it.

HOLT : That was ... [ crosstalk ] 

TRUMP : Because I want to get on to defeating ISIS , because I want to get on to creating jobs , because I want to get on to having a strong border , because I want to get on to things that are very important to me and that are very important to the country.

HOLT : I will let you respond . It 's important . But I just want to get the answer here . The birth certificate was produced in 2011 . You 've continued to tell the story and question the president 's legitimacy in 2012 , '13 , '14 , '15 ... 

TRUMP : Yeah.

HOLT : ... . as recently as January . So the question is , what changed your mind ? 

TRUMP : Well , nobody was pressing it , nobody was caring much about it . I figured you 'd ask the question tonight , of course . But nobody was caring much about it . But I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate . And I think I did a good job.Secretary Clinton also fought it . I mean , you know—now , everybody in mainstream is going to say , oh , that 's not true . Look , it 's true . Sidney Blumenthal sent a reporter—you just have to take a look at CNN , the last week , the interview with your former campaign manager . And she was involved . But just like she ca n't bring back jobs , she ca n't produce.

HOLT : I 'm sorry . I 'm just going to follow up—and I will let you respond to that , because there 's a lot there . But we 're talking about racial healing in this segment . What do you say to Americans , people of color who ... [ crosstalk ] 

TRUMP : Well , it was very—I say nothing . I say nothing , because I was able to get him to produce it . He should have produced it a long time before . I say nothing.But let me just tell you . When you talk about healing , I think that I 've developed very , very good relationships over the last little while with the African-American community . I think you can see that.And I feel that they really wanted me to come to that conclusion . And I think I did a great job and a great service not only for the country , but even for the president , in getting him to produce his birth certificate.

HOLT : Secretary Clinton ? 

CLINTON : Well , just listen to what you heard . [ laughter ] And clearly , as Donald just admitted , he knew he was going to stand on this debate stage , and Lester Holt was going to be asking us questions , so he tried to put the whole racist birther lie to bed.But it ca n't be dismissed that easily . He has really started his political activity based on this racist lie that our first black president was not an American citizen . There was absolutely no evidence for it , but he persisted , he persisted year after year , because some of his supporters , people that he was trying to bring into his fold , apparently believed it or wanted to believe it.But , remember , Donald started his career back in 1973 being sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination because he would not rent apartments in one of his developments to African-Americans , and he made sure that the people who worked for him understood that was the policy . He actually was sued twice by the Justice Department.So he has a long record of engaging in racist behavior . And the birther lie was a very hurtful one . You know , Barack Obama is a man of great dignity . And I could tell how much it bothered him and annoyed him that this was being touted and used against him.But I like to remember what Michelle Obama said in her amazing speech at our Democratic National Convention : When they go low , we go high . And Barack Obama went high , despite Donald Trump 's best efforts to bring him down.

HOLT : Mr. Trump , you can respond and we 're going to move on to the next segment.

TRUMP : I would love to respond . First of all , I got to watch in preparing for this some of your debates against Barack Obama . You treated him with terrible disrespect . And I watched the way you talk now about how lovely everything is and how wonderful you are . It does n't work that way . You were after him , you were trying to—you even sent out or your campaign sent out pictures of him in a certain garb , very famous pictures . I do n't think you can deny that.But just last week , your campaign manager said it was true . So when you tried to act holier than thou , it really does n't work . It really doesn't.Now , as far as the lawsuit , yes , when I was very young , I went into my father 's company , had a real estate company in Brooklyn and Queens , and we , along with many , many other companies throughout the country—it was a federal lawsuit—were sued . We settled the suit with zero—with no admission of guilt . It was very easy to do.I notice you bring that up a lot . And , you know , I also notice the very nasty commercials that you do on me in so many different ways , which I do n't do on you . Maybe I 'm trying to save the money.But , frankly , I look—I look at that , and I say , is n't that amazing ? Because I settled that lawsuit with no admission of guilt , but that was a lawsuit brought against many real estate firms , and it 's just one of those things.I 'll go one step further . In Palm Beach , Florida , tough community , a brilliant community , a wealthy community , probably the wealthiest community there is in the world , I opened a club , and really got great credit for it .TRUMP: No discrimination against African- Americans, against Muslims, against anybody. And it's a tremendously successful club. And I'm so glad I did it. And I have been given great credit for what I did. And I'm very, very proud of it. And that's the way I feel. That is the true way I feel.
HOLT: Our next segment is called "Securing America." We want to start with a 21st century war happening every day in this country. Our institutions are under cyber attack, and our secrets are being stolen. So my question is, who's behind it? And how do we fight it?
Secretary Clinton, this answer goes to you.
CLINTON: Well, I think cyber security, cyber warfare will be one of the biggest challenges facing the next president, because clearly we're facing at this point two different kinds of adversaries. There are the independent hacking groups that do it mostly for commercial reasons to try to steal information that they can use to make money.
But increasingly, we are seeing cyber attacks coming from states, organs of states. The most recent and troubling of these has been Russia. There's no doubt now that Russia has used cyber attacks against all kinds of organizations in our country, and I am deeply concerned about this. I know Donald's very praiseworthy of Vladimir Putin, but Putin is playing a really...
[crosstalk]
...tough, long game here. And one of the things he's done is to let loose cyber attackers to hack into government files, to hack into personal files, hack into the Democratic National Committee. And we recently have learned that, you know, that this is one of their preferred methods of trying to wreak havoc and collect information. We need to make it very clear—whether it's Russia, China, Iran or anybody else—the United States has much greater capacity. And we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information, our private-sector information or our public-sector information.
And we're going to have to make it clear that we don't want to use the kinds of tools that we have. We don't want to engage in a different kind of warfare. But we will defend the citizens of this country.
And the Russians need to understand that. I think they've been treating it as almost a probing, how far would we go, how much would we do. And that's why I was so—I was so shocked when Donald publicly invited Putin to hack into Americans. That is just unacceptable. It's one of the reasons why 50 national security officials who served in Republican information—in administrations...
HOLT : Your two minutes have expired.
CLINTON : ... have said that Donald is unfit to be the commander- in-chief . It 's comments like that that really worry people who understand the threats that we face.
HOLT : Mr. Trump , you have two minutes and the same question . Who 's behind it ? And how do we fight it ? 
TRUMP : I do want to say that I was just endorsed—and more are coming next week—it will be over 200 admirals , many of them here—admirals and generals endorsed me to lead this country . That just happened , and many more are coming . And I 'm very proud of it.In addition , I was just endorsed by ICE . They 've never endorsed anybody before on immigration . I was just endorsed by ICE . I was just recently endorsed—16,500 Border Patrol agents.So when Secretary Clinton talks about this , I mean , I 'll take the admirals and I 'll take the generals any day over the political hacks that I see that have led our country so brilliantly over the last 10 years with their knowledge . OK ? Because look at the mess that we 're in . Look at the mess that we 're in.As far as the cyber , I agree to parts of what Secretary Clinton said . We should be better than anybody else , and perhaps we 're not . I do n't think anybody knows it was Russia that broke into the DNC . She 's saying Russia , Russia , Russia , but I don't—maybe it was . I mean , it could be Russia , but it could also be China . It could also be lots of other people . It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds , OK ? You do n't know who broke in to DNC.But what did we learn with DNC ? We learned that Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of by your people , by Debbie Wasserman Schultz . Look what happened to her . But Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of . That 's what we learned.Now , whether that was Russia , whether that was China , whether it was another country , we do n't know , because the truth is , under President Obama we 've lost control of things that we used to have control over.We came in with the Internet , we came up with the Internet , and I think Secretary Clinton and myself would agree very much , when you look at what ISIS is doing with the Internet , they 're beating us at our own game . ISIS.So we have to get very , very tough on cyber and cyber warfare . It is—it is a huge problem . I have a son . He 's 10 years old . He has computers . He is so good with these computers , it 's unbelievable . The security aspect of cyber is very , very tough . And maybe it 's hardly doable.But I will say , we are not doing the job we should be doing . But that 's true throughout our whole governmental society . We have so many things that we have to do better , Lester , and certainly cyber is one of them.
HOLT : Secretary Clinton ? 
CLINTON : Well , I think there are a number of issues that we should be addressing . I have put forth a plan to defeat ISIS . It does involve going after them online . I think we need to do much more with our tech companies to prevent ISIS and their operatives from being able to use the Internet to radicalize , even direct people in our country and Europe and elsewhere.But we also have to intensify our air strikes against ISIS and eventually support our Arab and Kurdish partners to be able to actually take out ISIS in Raqqa , end their claim of being a Caliphate.We 're making progress . Our military is assisting in Iraq . And we 're hoping that within the year we 'll be able to push ISIS out of Iraq and then , you know , really squeeze them in Syria.But we have to be cognizant of the fact that they 've had foreign fighters coming to volunteer for them , foreign money , foreign weapons , so we have to make this the top priority.And I would also do everything possible to take out their leadership . I was involved in a number of efforts to take out Al Qaida leadership when I was secretary of state , including , of course , taking out bin Laden . And I think we need to go after Baghdadi , as well , make that one of our organizing principles . Because we 've got to defeat ISIS , and we 've got to do everything we can to disrupt their propaganda efforts online.
HOLT : You mention ISIS , and we think of ISIS certainly as over there , but there are American citizens who have been inspired to commit acts of terror on American soil , the latest incident , of course , the bombings we just saw in New York and New Jersey , the knife attack at a mall in Minnesota , in the last year , deadly attacks in San Bernardino and Orlando . I 'll ask this to both of you . Tell us specifically how you would prevent homegrown attacks by American citizens , Mr. Trump ? 
TRUMP : Well , first I have to say one thing , very important . Secretary Clinton is talking about taking out ISIS . `` We will take out ISIS . '' Well , President Obama and Secretary Clinton created a vacuum the way they got out of Iraq , because they got out—what , they should n't have been in , but once they got in , the way they got out was a disaster . And ISIS was formed.So she talks about taking them out . She 's been doing it a long time . She 's been trying to take them out for a long time . But they would n't have even been formed if they left some troops behind , like 10,000 or maybe something more than that . And then you would n't have had them.Or , as I 've been saying for a long time , and I think you 'll agree , because I said it to you once , had we taken the oil—and we should have taken the oil—ISIS would not have been able to form either , because the oil was their primary source of income . And now they have the oil all over the place , including the oil—a lot of the oil in Libya , which was another one of her disasters.
HOLT : Secretary Clinton ? 
CLINTON : Well , I hope the fact-checkers are turning up the volume and really working hard . Donald supported the invasion of Iraq.
TRUMP : Wrong.
CLINTON : That is absolutely proved over and over again.
TRUMP : Wrong . Wrong.
CLINTON : He actually advocated for the actions we took in Libya and urged that Gadhafi be taken out , after actually doing some business with him one time.But the larger point—and he says this constantly—is George W. Bush made the agreement about when American troops would leave Iraq , not Barack Obama.And the only way that American troops could have stayed in Iraq is to get an agreement from the then-Iraqi government that would have protected our troops , and the Iraqi government would not give that.But let 's talk about the question you asked , Lester .CLINTON: The question you asked is, what do we do here in the United States? That's the most important part of this. How do we prevent attacks? How do we protect our people?
And I think we've got to have an intelligence surge, where we are looking for every scrap of information. I was so proud of law enforcement in New York, in Minnesota, in New Jersey. You know, they responded so quickly, so professionally to the attacks that occurred by Rahami. And they brought him down. And we may find out more information because he is still alive, which may prove to be an intelligence benefit.
So we've got to do everything we can to vacuum up intelligence from Europe, from the Middle East. That means we've got to work more closely with our allies, and that's something that Donald has been very dismissive of.
We're working with NATO, the longest military alliance in the history of the world, to really turn our attention to terrorism. We're working with our friends in the Middle East, many of which, as you know, are Muslim majority nations. Donald has consistently insulted Muslims abroad, Muslims at home, when we need to be cooperating with Muslim nations and with the American Muslim community.
They're on the front lines. They can provide information to us that we might not get anywhere else. They need to have close working cooperation with law enforcement in these communities, not be alienated and pushed away as some of Donald's rhetoric, unfortunately, has led to.
HOLT: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: Well, I have to respond.
HOLT: Please respond.
TRUMP: The secretary said very strongly about working with—we've been working with them for many years, and we have the greatest mess anyone's ever seen. You look at the Middle East, it's a total mess. Under your direction, to a large extent.
But you look at the Middle East, you started the Iran deal, that's another beauty where you have a country that was ready to fall, I mean, they were doing so badly. They were choking on the sanctions. And now they're going to be actually probably a major power at some point pretty soon, the way they're going.
But when you look at NATO, I was asked on a major show, what do you think of NATO? And you have to understand, I'm a businessperson. I did really well. But I have common sense. And I said, well, I'll tell you. I haven't given lots of thought to NATO. But two things.
Number one, the 28 countries of NATO, many of them aren't paying their fair share. Number two—and that bothers me, because we should be asking—we're defending them, and they should at least be paying us what they're supposed to be paying by treaty and contract.
And, number two, I said, and very strongly, NATO could be obsolete, because—and I was very strong on this, and it was actually covered very accurately in the New York Times, which is unusual for the New York Times, to be honest—but I said, they do not focus on terror. And I was very strong. And I said it numerous times.
And about four months ago, I read on the front page of the Wall Street Journal that NATO is opening up a major terror division. And I think that's great. And I think we should get—because we pay approximately 73 percent of the cost of NATO. It's a lot of money to protect other people. But I'm all for NATO. But I said they have to focus on terror, also.
And they're going to do that. And that was—believe me—I'm sure I'm not going to get credit for it—but that was largely because of what I was saying and my criticism of NATO.
I think we have to get NATO to go into the Middle East with us, in addition to surrounding nations, and we have to knock the hell out of ISIS, and we have to do it fast, when ISIS formed in this vacuum created by Barack Obama and Secretary Clinton. And believe me, you were the ones that took out the troops. Not only that, you named the day. They couldn't believe it. They sat back probably and said, I can't believe it. They said...
CLINTON: Lester, we've covered...
TRUMP: No, wait a minute.
CLINTON: We've covered this ground.
TRUMP: When they formed, when they formed, this is something that never should have happened. It should have never happened. Now, you're talking about taking out ISIS. But you were there, and you were secretary of state when it was a little infant. Now it's in over 30 countries. And you're going to stop them? I don't think so.
HOLT: Mr. Trump, a lot of these are judgment questions. You had supported the war in Iraq before the invasion. What makes your...
TRUMP: I did not support the war in Iraq.
HOLT: In 2002...
TRUMP: That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her, because she—frankly, I think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media.
HOLT: My question is, since you supported it...
TRUMP: Just—would you like to hear...
HOLT : ... why is your—why is your judgment ... 

TRUMP : Wait a minute . I was against the war in Iraq . Just so you put it out.

HOLT : The record shows otherwise , but why—why was ... 

TRUMP : The record does not show that.

HOLT : Why was—is your judgment any ... 

TRUMP : The record shows that I 'm right . When I did an interview with Howard Stern , very lightly , first time anyone 's asked me that , I said , very lightly , I do n't know , maybe , who knows ? Essentially . I then did an interview with Neil Cavuto . We talked about the economy is more important . I then spoke to Sean Hannity , which everybody refuses to call Sean Hannity . I had numerous conversations with Sean Hannity at Fox . And Sean Hannity said—and he called me the other day—and I spoke to him about it—he said you were totally against the war , because he was for the war.

HOLT : Why is your judgment better than ... 

TRUMP : And when he—excuse me . And that was before the war started . Sean Hannity said very strongly to me and other people—he 's willing to say it , but nobody wants to call him . I was against the war . He said , you used to have fights with me , because Sean was in favor of the war.And I understand that side , also , not very much , because we should have never been there . But nobody called Sean Hannity . And then they did an article in a major magazine , shortly after the war started . I think in '04 . But they did an article which had me totally against the war in Iraq.And one of your compatriots said , you know , whether it was before or right after , Trump was definitely—because if you read this article , there 's no doubt . But if somebody—and I 'll ask the press—if somebody would call up Sean Hannity , this was before the war started . He and I used to have arguments about the war . I said , it 's a terrible and a stupid thing . It 's going to destabilize the Middle East . And that 's exactly what it 's done . It 's been a disaster.

HOLT : My reference was to what you had said in 2002 , and my question was ... 

TRUMP : No , no . You did n't hear what I said.

HOLT : Why is your judgment—why is your judgment any different than Mrs. Clinton 's judgment ? 

TRUMP : Well , I have much better judgment than she does . There 's no question about that . I also have a much better temperament than she has , you know ? [ laughter ] I have a much better—she spent—let me tell you—she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an advertising—you know , they get Madison Avenue into a room , they put names—oh , temperament , let 's go after—I think my strongest asset , maybe by far , is my temperament . I have a winning temperament . I know how to win . She does not have a ... 
HOLT : Secretary Clinton ? TRUMP : Wait . The AFL-CIO the other day , behind the blue screen , I do n't know who you were talking to , Secretary Clinton , but you were totally out of control . I said , there 's a person with a temperament that 's got a problem.

HOLT : Secretary Clinton ? 

CLINTON : Whew , OK. [ laughter ] Let 's talk about two important issues that were briefly mentioned by Donald , first , NATO . You know , NATO as a military alliance has something called Article 5 , and basically it says this : An attack on one is an attack on all . And you know the only time it 's ever been invoked ? After 9/11 , when the 28 nations of NATO said that they would go to Afghanistan with us to fight terrorism , something that they still are doing by our side.With respect to Iran , when I became secretary of state , Iran was weeks away from having enough nuclear material to form a bomb . They had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle under the Bush administration . They had built covert facilities . They had stocked them with centrifuges that were whirling away.And we had sanctioned them . I voted for every sanction against Iran when I was in the Senate , but it was n't enough . So I spent a year-and-a-half putting together a coalition that included Russia and China to impose the toughest sanctions on Iran.And we did drive them to the negotiating table . And my successor , John Kerry , and President Obama got a deal that put a lid on Iran 's nuclear program without firing a single shot . That 's diplomacy . That 's coalition-building . That 's working with other nations.The other day , I saw Donald saying that there were some Iranian sailors on a ship in the waters off of Iran , and they were taunting American sailors who were on a nearby ship . He said , you know , if they taunted our sailors , I 'd blow them out of the water and start another war . That 's not good judgment.

TRUMP : That would not start a war.

CLINTON : That is not the right temperament to be commander-in- chief , to be taunted . And the worst part ... 

TRUMP : No , they were taunting us.

CLINTON : ... of what we heard Donald say has been about nuclear weapons . He has said repeatedly that he did n't care if other nations got nuclear weapons , Japan , South Korea , even Saudi Arabia . It has been the policy of the United States , Democrats and Republicans , to do everything we could to reduce the proliferation of nuclear weapons . He even said , well , you know , if there were nuclear war in East Asia , well , you know , that 's fine ... 

TRUMP : Wrong.

CLINTON : ... have a good time , folks.

TRUMP : It 's lies.

CLINTON : And , in fact , his cavalier attitude about nuclear weapons is so deeply troubling . That is the number-one threat we face in the world . And it becomes particularly threatening if terrorists ever get their hands on any nuclear material . So a man who can be provoked by a tweet should not have his fingers anywhere near the nuclear codes , as far as I think anyone with any sense about this should be concerned.

TRUMP : That line 's getting a little bit old , I must say . I would like to ... 

CLINTON : It 's a good one , though . It well describes the problem . [ laughter ] 

TRUMP : It 's not an accurate one at all . It 's not an accurate one . So I just want to give a lot of things—and just to respond . I agree with her on one thing . The single greatest problem the world has is nuclear armament , nuclear weapons , like you think and your—your president thinks.Nuclear is the single greatest threat . Just to go down the list , we defend Japan , we defend Germany , we defend South Korea , we defend Saudi Arabia , we defend countries . They do not pay us . But they should be paying us , because we are providing tremendous service and we 're losing a fortune . That 's why we 're losing—we 're losing—we lose on everything . I say , who makes these—we lose on everything . All I said , that it 's very possible that if they do n't pay a fair share , because this is n't 40 years ago where we could do what we 're doing . We ca n't defend Japan , a behemoth , selling us cars by the million ... 
HOLT : We need to move on.
TRUMP : Well , wait , but it 's very important . All I said was , they may have to defend themselves or they have to help us out . We 're a country that owes $ 20 trillion . They have to help us out.
HOLT : Our last ... 
TRUMP : As far as the nuclear is concerned , I agree . It is the single greatest threat that this country has.
HOLT : Which leads to my next question , as we enter our last segment here on the , still on the subject of securing America . On nuclear weapons , President Obama reportedly considered changing the nation 's longstanding policy on first use . Do you support the current policy ? Mr. Trump , you have two minutes on that.
TRUMP : Well , I have to say that , you know , for what Secretary Clinton was saying about nuclear with Russia , she 's very cavalier in the way she talks about various countries . But Russia has been expanding their—they have a much newer capability than we do . We have not been updating from the new standpoint.I looked the other night . I was seeing B-52s , they 're old enough that your father , your grandfather could be flying them . We are not—we are not keeping up with other countries . I would like everybody to end it , just get rid of it . But I would certainly not do first strike.I think that once the nuclear alternative happens , it 's over . At the same time , we have to be prepared . I ca n't take anything off the table . Because you look at some of these countries , you look at North Korea , we 're doing nothing there . China should solve that problem for us . China should go into North Korea . China is totally powerful as it relates to North Korea.And by the way , another one powerful is the worst deal I think I 've ever seen negotiated that you started is the Iran deal . Iran is one of their biggest trading partners . Iran has power over North Korea.And when they made that horrible deal with Iran , they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea . And they should have done something with respect to Yemen and all these other places.And when asked to Secretary Kerry , why did n't you do that ? Why did n't you add other things into the deal ? One of the great giveaways of all time , of all time , including $ 400 million in cash . Nobody 's ever seen that before . That turned out to be wrong . It was actually $ 1.7 billion in cash , obviously , I guess for the hostages . It certainly looks that way.So you say to yourself , why did n't they make the right deal ? This is one of the worst deals ever made by any country in history . The deal with Iran will lead to nuclear problems . All they have to do is sit back 10 years , and they do n't have to do much.
HOLT : Your two minutes is expired.
TRUMP : And they 're going to end up getting nuclear . I met with Bibi Netanyahu the other day . Believe me , he 's not a happy camper.
HOLT : All right . Mrs. Clinton , Secretary Clinton , you have two minutes.
CLINTON : Well , let me—let me start by saying , words matter . Words matter when you run for president . And they really matter when you are president . And I want to reassure our allies in Japan and South Korea and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties and we will honor them.It is essential that America 's word be good . And so I know that this campaign has caused some questioning and worries on the part of many leaders across the globe . I 've talked with a number of them . But I want to—on behalf of myself , and I think on behalf of a majority of the American people , say that , you know , our word is good.It 's also important that we look at the entire global situation . There 's no doubt that we have other problems with Iran . But personally , I 'd rather deal with the other problems having put that lid on their nuclear program than still to be facing that.And Donald never tells you what he would do . Would he have started a war ? Would he have bombed Iran ? If he 's going to criticize a deal that has been very successful in giving us access to Iranian facilities that we never had before , then he should tell us what his alternative would be . But it 's like his plan to defeat ISIS . He says it 's a secret plan , but the only secret is that he has no plan.So we need to be more precise in how we talk about these issues . People around the word follow our presidential campaigns so closely , trying to get hints about what we will do . Can they rely on us ? Are we going to lead the world with strength and in accordance with our values ? That 's what I intend to do . I intend to be a leader of our country that people can count on , both here at home and around the world , to make decisions that will further peace and prosperity , but also stand up to bullies , whether they 're abroad or at home.We can not let those who would try to destabilize the world to interfere with American interests and security ... HOLT : Your two minutes is ... CLINTON : ... to be given any opportunities at all.HOLT : ... is expired.TRUMP : Lester , one thing I 'd like to say.HOLT : Very quickly . Twenty seconds.TRUMP : I will go very quickly . But I will tell you that Hillary will tell you to go to her website and read all about how to defeat ISIS , which she could have defeated by never having it , you know , get going in the first place . Right now , it 's getting tougher and tougher to defeat them , because they 're in more and more places , more and more states , more and more nations.HOLT : Mr. Trump ... TRUMP : And it 's a big problem . And as far as Japan is concerned , I want to help all of our allies , but we are losing billions and billions of dollars . We can not be the policemen of the world . We can not protect countries all over the world ... HOLT : We have just ... 

TRUMP : ... where they 're not paying us what we need.
HOLT : We have just a few final questions ... TRUMP : And she does n't say that , because she 's got no business ability . We need heart . We need a lot of things . But you have to have some basic ability . And sadly , she does n't have that . All of the things that she 's talking about could have been taken care of during the last 10 years , let 's say , while she had great power . But they were n't taken care of . And if she ever wins this race , they wo n't be taken care of.
HOLT : Mr. Trump , this year Secretary Clinton became the first woman nominated for president by a major party . Earlier this month , you said she does n't have , quote , `` a presidential look . '' She 's standing here right now . What did you mean by that ? 
TRUMP : She does n't have the look . She does n't have the stamina . I said she does n't have the stamina . And I do n't believe she does have the stamina . To be president of this country , you need tremendous stamina.
HOLT : The quote was , `` I just do n't think she has the presidential look . `` 
TRUMP : You have—wait a minute . Wait a minute , Lester . You asked me a question . Did you ask me a question ? You have to be able to negotiate our trade deals . You have to be able to negotiate , that 's right , with Japan , with Saudi Arabia . I mean , can you imagine , we 're defending Saudi Arabia ? And with all of the money they have , we 're defending them , and they 're not paying ? All you have to do is speak to them . Wait . You have so many different things you have to be able to do , and I do n't believe that Hillary has the stamina.
HOLT : Let 's let her respond . 
CLINTON : Well , as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal , a cease-fire , a release of dissidents , an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world , or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee , he can talk to me about stamina . [ applause ] 
TRUMP : The world—let me tell you . Let me tell you . Hillary has experience , but it 's bad experience . We have made so many bad deals during the last—so she 's got experience , that I agree . [ applause ] But it 's bad , bad experience . Whether it 's the Iran deal that you 're so in love with , where we gave them $ 150 billion back , whether it 's the Iran deal , whether it 's anything you can—name—you almost ca n't name a good deal . I agree . She 's got experience , but it 's bad experience . And this country ca n't afford to have another four years of that kind of experience.

HOLT : We are at—we are at the final question . [ applause ] 

CLINTON : Well , one thing . One thing , Lester.

HOLT : Very quickly , because we 're at the final question now.

CLINTON : You know , he tried to switch from looks to stamina . But this is a man who has called women pigs , slobs and dogs , and someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers , who has said ... 

TRUMP : I never said that. 

CLINTON : ... . women do n't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.

TRUMP : I did n't say that.

CLINTON : And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest . He loves beauty contests , supporting them and hanging around them . And he called this woman `` Miss Piggy . '' Then he called her `` Miss Housekeeping , '' because she was Latina . Donald , she has a name.

TRUMP : Where did you find this ? Where did you find this ? 

CLINTON : Her name is Alicia Machado.

TRUMP : Where did you find this ? 

CLINTON : And she has become a U.S. citizen , and you can bet ... 

TRUMP : Oh , really ? 

CLINTON : ... she 's going to vote this November.

TRUMP : OK , good . Let me just tell you ... [ applause ] 

HOLT : Mr. Trump , could we just take 10 seconds and then we ask the final question ... TRUMP : You know , Hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials . Some of it 's said in entertainment . Some of it 's said—somebody who 's been very vicious to me , Rosie O'Donnell , I said very tough things to her , and I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her.But you want to know the truth ? I was going to say something ... HOLT: Please very quickly.
TRUMP: ... extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, "I can't do it. I just can't do it. It's inappropriate. It's not nice." But she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me, many of which are absolutely untrue. They're untrue. And they're misrepresentations.
And I will tell you this, Lester: It's not nice. And I don't deserve that.
But it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done. It's hundreds of millions of ads. And the only gratifying thing is, I saw the polls come in today, and with all of that money...
HOLT: We have to move on to the final question.
TRUMP: ... $200 million is spent, and I'm either winning or tied, and I've spent practically nothing. [applause]

HOLT : One of you will not win this election . So my final question to you tonight , are you willing to accept the outcome as the will of the voters ? Secretary Clinton ? 
CLINTON : Well , I support our democracy . And sometimes you win , sometimes you lose . But I certainly will support the outcome of this election.And I know Donald 's trying very hard to plant doubts about it , but I hope the people out there understand : This election 's really up to you . It 's not about us so much as it is about you and your families and the kind of country and future you want . So I sure hope you will get out and vote as though your future depended on it , because I think it does.
HOLT : Mr. Trump , very quickly , same question . Will you accept the outcome as the will of the voters ? 
TRUMP : I want to make America great again . We are a nation that is seriously troubled . We 're losing our jobs . People are pouring into our country.The other day , we were deporting 800 people . And perhaps they passed the wrong button , they pressed the wrong button , or perhaps worse than that , it was corruption , but these people that we were going to deport for good reason ended up becoming citizens . Ended up becoming citizens . And it was 800 . And now it turns out it might be 1,800 , and they do n't even know.
HOLT : Will you accept the outcome of the election ? 
TRUMP : Look , here 's the story . I want to make America great again . I 'm going to be able to do it . I do n't believe Hillary will . The answer is , if she wins , I will absolutely support her . [ applause ] 